1

Introduction
At the end of 2019, a new type of coronavirus, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2(SARS-CoV-2) rapidly swept the world. According to the report of World Health Organization (WHO), as of May 25th, 2024, there were 704,433,855 confirmed cases ( Fig. 1 A) and 7,007,868 deaths ( Fig. 1 B) of COVID-19 in 223 countries or regions worldwide, with a fatality rate of 1.07 % ( https://covid19.who.int/ ). and it showed that according to amino acid sequence and phylogenetic analysis, SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) were all β coronaviruses ( Fig. 1 C) (GISAID accession no. EPI_ISL_402124) [ 1 , 2 ].
Fig. 1 Incidence, mortality, and phylogenetic tree analysis of COVID-19 A. Cumulative number of SARS-CoV-2 diagnosed in various countries. B. Cumulative number of deaths from SARS-CoV-2 in various countries. C. Cluster analysis of coronaviruses. Fig. 1

Similar to the symptoms of SARS-CoV patients, many clinical cases have shown that acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) caused by cytokine storm and secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (sHLH) leading to multiple system damage, both of which are related to CRS (cytokine release syndrome) [ 3 ]. SARS-CoV-2 acts on the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors on oral epithelial cells of the respiratory system, alveolar type II epithelial cells, and other respiratory tract cells, infecting host cells [ 4 , 5 ]. Single-cell RNA sequencing results from TCGA, FANTOM5 and other databases showed that ACE2 was highly expressed in a variety of cells such as alveolar type II cells, esophagus lamellar cells, ileocolonic cells, and proximal tubule cells of the renal [ 6 ]. The site provides the possibility for SARS-CoV-2 infection and metastasis. After invading the respiratory system, SARS-CoV-2, with intracellular self-replication, leads to leukocytes chemotaxis to the infection site, resulting in vasodilation, increased permeability of alveolar wall, decreased pulmonary surfactant, and loss of alveolar gas exchange function [ 1 , 3 ].

2

Genomic structure and infection pathway of SARS-CoV-2
The SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the β-coronaviruses. It is an unsegmented single-stranded positive stranded RNA virus, each of which has a genome length of about 30,000 nucleotides. About 40 % of the viral genome consists of nucleotides G and C, encoding 9860 amino acids. The genome contains two flanking untranslated regions (UTR) and an open reading frame (ORF) encoding the entire part of poly protein. The ORF1a and ORF1b genes, which account for about two-thirds of the entire genome, encode 16 nonstructural proteins. Its genome composition is the same as that of other coronaviruses, with a ORFs, including replicase (ORF 1a, ORF 1b), spike protein (S), envelope (E), stroma egg-self (M), nuclear protein (N) [ 7 ] ( Fig. 2 A). Specifically, S protein is the most important membrane protein on the surface of coronavirus. It consists of two domains. The part near the N terminal forms a spherical domain, and the part near the C terminal forms a rod-like structure through the membrane. N protein is another important structural protein in coronavirus. In the coronavirus particle, the N protein is located at the core of the particle and occurs in the form of Genomic RNA. M protein is a transmembrane protein, and its binding with S protein is related to the assembly of virus particles. The binding of M protein and N protein enables the structural stability of virus RNP. The E protein, thought to be a viral porin, can disrupt ion concentration homeostasis in cells. Its RNA is tightly packed with nucleocapsid 9(N protein) Coated with phospholipid bilayer and spike protein (S protein) [ 8 ]. SARS-CoV-2 enters the cell and completes the process of self-replication, which mainly includes: The S protein on the membrane surface is composed of S1 and S2 subunits. It is activated by transmembrane protease serine 2(TMPRSS2) and binds to the receptor ACE2, facilitating the entry of the virus into the substance [ 9 , 10 ]. Secondly, after entering the cell, furin-mediated cleavage of the S2 subunit releases hydrophobic fusion peptide, phospholipid bilayer fuses with the host cell membrane, and releases the membrane core capsid N protein, positive strand RNA and open reading frame 1a/b(ORF1a/b) bind to express a variety of proteins, including pp1a and pp1ab. Cleavage by two viral proteases, papain-like protease (PL pro ) and main chytrypsin-like protease (M pro ) to produce non-structural proteins [ 11 , 12 ], in which RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) enzymes and spinases are used to participate in viral transcription and replication. SARS-CoV-2 uses full-length positive-strand genomic RNA as a template to replicate to form full-length negative-strand RNA, and then synthesizes a large amount of positive-strand RNA, which is assembled with N protein to form nucleocapsid, and then exocytosis with other structural proteins to form virus released into the extracellular [ 2 ]( Fig. 2 B). Three aspects of viral spike proteins, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, and chymotrypsin are described below.
Fig. 2 Structure (A) and invasion pathway (B) of SARS-CoV-2. Fig. 2

2.1

S protein
S protein, the medium through which coronavirus entering target cells, is a major immunogenic antigen composed of a receptor binding domain (RBD) S1 and carboxyl-terminal membrane fusion domain S2. It binds specifically to amino terminal ACE2 to form a trimeric structure [ 13 ]. The biophysical analysis of expressed and purified S protein by cryo-electron microscopy showed the binding capacity of SARS-CoV-2 and its target receptor ACE2 is 4∼20 times that of SARS-CoV [ 14 ].
Protease cleavage sites at the S1–S2 junction are critical for activating membrane fusion, virus entry, and syncytia formation. The furanase on which the cleavage depends is a proprotein convertases (PC) located in the TGN (trans-Golgi network, TGN). Furanase is usually expressed in the lung, which is one reason for the entry of respiratory viruses into cells [ 15 ]. Depending on the joint action of transmembrane TMPRSS2 and furanase, the S protein is activated by host furanase and cleaved into S1 and S2 subunits. RBD binds to the host receptor with the help of transmembrane TMPRSS2 and triggers the conformational change of S2 subunit, making the virus fuse with the cell membrane [ 15 ].

2.2

RdRP
After the coronavirus infects host cells, RdRP, also known as NSP12 encoded by the coronavirus itself, forms an important component of the subsequent replication and transcription complex (RTC), which with NSP (non-structural proteins, NSP), selects matching mRNA templates to determine transcription of mRNA. It is involved in the 5′cap or 3′polyadenylic acid tail of the product mRNA [ 16 ], occupying one of the core positions in the virus replication and transcription.
The structure of the mini-RTC was analyzed using cryo-electron microscopy. The results showed the structure was assembled from RdRP, viral RNA, NSP7 and NSP8, and two helicase molecules NSP13-1 and NSP13-2 [ 17 , 18 ]. There are two different structures of the micro-RTCs, NSP13-1 and NSP13-2 interact to stabilize the overall structure of the micro-RTC. During viral RNA reproduction, NSP 13-2 anchors the 5′-amplifed RNA template and interacts with NSP7-NSP8. NSP12-RNA interactions form RTC to complete the virus life cycle [ 16 , 18 ].
Coronavirus encodes RTC (assembled into 16 NSPs) that promote viral replication and transcription. Among them, NSP12 binds to RdRP and viral RNA, while NSP8 and NSP7 give NSP12 RNA processing ability [ 17 ]. When RdRP holoenzyme (comprised of NSP7, NSP8, and NSP12) synthesizes SARS-CoV-2 RNA, the NSP13 amino-terminal domain identified as a helicase binds to the amino-terminal of NSP8 to catalyze the virus, and the double-stranded oligonucleotides melt into single chain. The presence of RdRP can increase the catalytic rate of NSP13 [ 16 ].

2.3

M pro protease
In the process of coronavirus expression varying multiple proteins, the main chymotrypsin-like protease (M pro , also known as 3C-like Proteinase, 3CL pro ) and papain-like protease (PL pro ) process the virus, and the multi-protein translation of RNA is very important [ 19 , 20 ]. M pro has at least 11 cleavage sites in the RdRp precursor of the virus, replicase 1 ab (∼790 kDa), and most of the sites are identified by Leu-Gln↓ (Ser, Ala, Gly) (↓ means cutting Site). The domains I and II of M pro are six-strand anti-parallel β-barrels forming a substrate binding site. The five helices form a globular cluster of domain III, which is involved in regulating the dimerization of M pro [ 21 ] by forming a salt bridge mainly through the Glu290 site of one protomer and Arg4 of the other protomer. The dimerization of M pro is essential for catalytic activity. Each -NH2 residue in the dimer interacts with each Glu166 in another protomer, thus helping to form the substrate binding site capsule [ 22 ]. Previous studies have shown that replacing Ser284, Thr285 and Ile286 with Ala residues in SARS-CoV-2 M pro can increase the catalytic activity of the protease by 3.6 times. At the same time, the accumulation of two domains III of the dimer increased the activity of Mpro. However, the M pro catalytic efficiency of SARS-CoV-2 (k cat /K m  = 3426.1 ± 416.9s −1 M −1 ) is only slightly higher than that of SARS-CoV (k cat /K m  = 3011.3 ± 294.6s −1 M −1 ). Meanwhile, studies based on SARS-CoV show that M pro has different crystal structures at different pH values, and has high catalytic activity in the structure of pH 7.3–8.5 [ 22 ].

3

Clinical features and diagnosis of COVID-19

3.1

Clinical symptoms
The gender of susceptible populations for COVID-19 has not yet been determined, and according to the statistics, the difference is small (48.6 % female) [ 23 ]. However, according to various studies, the population who are susceptible to COVID-19 of is range in age from 40 to 60 [ [23] , [24] , [25] ].
Infected patients improves within 2 weeks, with fever, cough, and dyspnea as the main symptoms [ 23 ]. Besides, muscle pain, fatigue, and spitting are also more common [ 24 , 26 ]. Less common symptoms include nasal congestion, sore throat, headache, hemoptysis, and diarrhea. Some patients have kidney injury and acute myocardial injury [ 23 , 27 ].

3.2

Diagnostic technology
The most effective response to the spread of COVID-19 has been proven to be rapid detection, isolation, and treatment. Pathogen detection can be divided into imaging, and viral isolation and culture detection, viral RNA molecular biology detection and immunological detection based on viral antigen and antibody reaction. Herein, the imaging diagnosis, molecular biological and ELISA detection techniques of viral will be introduced in detail.

3.2.1

CT/PET
Chest imaging, especially chest CT, is one of the most sensitive imaging techniques for detecting lung abnormalities. Quantitative CT analysis provides useful information for predicting disease progression in the management of COVID-19 patients plays a key role. For example, one study compared the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 2-[ 18 F] FDG PET/CT imaging workflows during three waves in health facilities in southern Italy [ 28 ]. This study showed that PET/CT based technology can well assist patients in disease diagnosis. An evaluation report based on chest CT in COVID-19 patients has shown that the use of structured radiological reports in COVID-19 patients can improve referring physician satisfaction, optimize reporting time, and provide more and higher quality information in the report compared to conventional analysis [ 29 ]. In a prospective study, 89 volunteers who had been vaccinated against COVID-19 were included in ultrasound examinations to assess the association between lymphadenopathy and side effects of vaccination. The results showed that CT can be a good auxiliary judge of vaccine-induced lymphadenopathy, and confirmed that there was no statistical difference between vaccine side effects and lymphadenopathy [ 30 ]. Post-vaccine AIH-like syndrome raises worries about a risk of unprecedented immunological side effects, especially in individuals predisposed to autoinflammatory disorders [ 31 ]. COVID-19 vaccine-induced AIH is extremely uncommon and has an exceptional prognosis. This also suggests that hepatologists may be able to use CT ultrasound diagnosis in combination with indicators such as jaundice or elevated liver enzymes to analyze possible side effects of vaccination. It is worth noting that with the mutation of the virus, the virulence of pneumonia is decreasing, and the characteristics and evolution of CT images of COVID-19 have certain limitations. It further suggests that perhaps artificial intelligence based on deep learning can provide better help for clinicians in diagnosis.

3.2.2

RT-PCR
Timely quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 is of great significance for controlling the spread of COVID-19, including in the social settings, and in the public health response [ 32 , 33 ]. The recent spread of SARS-CoV-2 has shown the urgent need for accurate and rapid diagnostic tests to promote clinical and public health interventions, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests are used to rule out infection in high-risk populations [ 34 ]. In one study, a method was described circumventing RNA extraction in COVID-19 testing by performing RT-PCR directly on heat-inactivated or lysed samples ( Fig. 3 A). This study designed detection primers targeting the E, N and RdRP genes of the novel coronavirus ( Fig. 3 B), and conducted 85 clinical samples and heat map analysis to evaluate the effectiveness of the method [ 35 ] ( Fig. 3 C). Swab samples have been used in the analysis as a cost reduction strategy. 32,466 RT-PCR reactions were used to detect 133,816 samples, with an overall efficiency of 4121 RT-PCR reactions, saving 101,350 (76 %) RT-PCR reactions [ 36 ] results of heat-inactivated nasopharyngeal swab samples (65 °C, 30min) were similar to those RT-PCR results, which could greatly save time and cost. This may help expand COVID-19 testing [ 35 ].
Fig. 3 N, E, and RdRP genes of SARS-CoV-2 were detected by RT-PCR A. Heat-inactivated and lysed samples were assayed separately for PCR amplification; B. Targeted detection of the E, N and RdRP genes of novel coronaviruses; C. Heatmap analysis of the effects of different treatments for gene amplification of viral samples. Fig. 3

3.2.3

LAMP
Compared with RT-PCR, the detection of Loop-mediate Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) technology shows great potential. Some SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR and RT-LAMP nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs can be nucleic acid tests without prior RNA purification or extraction steps [ 37 , 38 ]. The stability of exposed RNA was tested with swab samples collected with specific medium (Aimes), and the IVT RNA molecules of the viral N gene were quantitatively titrated against the swab samples of COVID-19 negative control subjects. The effects of reagents and pyrolysis are similar to previous reports for other RNA viruses, as well as tests for thermal inactivation using swab specimens for direct RT-qPCR analysis [ 39 , 40 ]. These results suggest that both untreated cotton swab and high-temperature pyrolysis cotton swab samples can be suit to detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA in cotton swab samples of potential individuals. In one study, a two-color RT-LAMP assay protocol for detecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA was test [ 41 ]. RNA samples isolated from 95 pharyngeal swab specimens were analyzed by the RT-LAMP assay using a 96-well plate ( Fig. 4 A). After a 30-min incubation at 65 °C, quantification of the red-to-yellow color change in all wells using spectrophotometric OD measurements ( Fig. 4 B), the results showed that the RT-LAMP assay reliably detected SARS-CoV-2 RNA with an RT-qPCR cycle threshold (CT) number of up to 30, with a sensitivity of 97.5 % and a specificity of 99.7 %. In another study, Cap-iLAMP which combined a hybridization capture-based RNA extraction of gargle lavage samples with an improved colorimetric RT-LAMP assay ( Fig. 4 C) and smartphone-based color scoring was presented ( Fig. 4 D). This method can complete sample detection in less than 1 h. The sensitivity and specificity of another colorimetric RT-LAMP detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in throat swab samples from clinical individuals showed the colorimetric RT-LAMP detection pair with high-speed, low price and low equipment requirements is as high as the sample with CT ~ 30 has good sensitivity [ 42 ].
Fig. 4 Detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in throat swab samples from clinical individuals using by RT-LAMP A. RT-LAMP assay for SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing using a 96-well plate; B. Cap-iLAMP combines hybridisation capture-based RNA extraction of mouthwash samples with improved colourimetric RT-LAMP analysis; D. Colour reaction test for detection of viral copy number. Fig. 4

3.2.4

RPA
Nucleic acid testing is mainly based on high sensitivity and high specificity, but it is time-consuming and expensive. There have been many innovative applications of LAMP technology in COVID-19 diagnosis in recent years [ 38 , 41 , 43 ], due to the global demand for SARS-CoV-2 detection, Enhanced Recombinase Polymerase Amplification (eRPA) is more isothermal than other applications. The improvement of technology has greater potential development advantages.
In one study, single-tube probe RT-RPA has shown 100 % diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. The detection limit was 7.74 copies per reaction, and high-concentration samples could be obtained within 7 min [ 44 ]. Therefore, this assay is one of the fastest nucleic acid-based SARS-CoV-2 detection methods. To extract viral nucleic acid from clinical swabs has become a limiting. Recent studies have shown that thermal lysis without RNA extraction has proven to be a rapid method for lysing and inactivating viruses for diagnostic tests [ 41 , 45 ]. To select reverse transcriptase in RT-RPA based on the method will affect the enlargement efficiency of recombinant enzyme polymerase. Superscript IV reverse transcriptase is used in combination with RNaseH, both of which are designed to have minimal RNaseH activity and can improve target synthesis ability, robustness and synthesis rate [ 46 ]. TCEP was added to a new crown oropharyngeal swab buffer and EDTA and engineered enzyme were heated at 75 °C [ 47 ]. In another study, a molecular diagnostic test for SARS-CoV-2 based on an enhanced recombinase polymerase amplification (eRPA) reaction was reported. SARS-CoV-2 RNA was amplified by eRPA using primers targeting the N ( Fig. 5 A) or S ( Fig. 5 B) gene and reactions were read out by lateral flow strip ( Fig. 5 C) [ 48 ]. Compared with RT-PCR, all samples with more than 5 molecules per reaction obtained consistent results. The assay is also highly specific, showing no cross-reactivity (0 of 80 tests) with 10,000 copies of RNA from other coronaviruses, i.e., MERS, SARS-CoV, CoV-HKU1, or CoV-229E ( Fig. 5 D). These important improvements in RPA indicate the potential of using isothermal amplification to detect SARS-CoV-2 in daily life.
Fig. 5 N and S genes of SARS-CoV-2 analysis using by eRPA method Amplification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA by eRPA using primers targeting the N (A) or S (B) genes. Ct values gradually increased with decreasing assay concentration (C).Cross-reactivity tests with other coronaviruses(D). Fig. 5

3.2.5

ELSIA
In addition to the molecular nucleic acid tests mentioned, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is used to detect antibodies to help determine whether a patient is infected with the virus [ [49] , [50] , [51] ]. Antibody tests for COVID-19 are more reliable after 2 weeks of symptoms. Recently, a reliable, rapid, and quantitative point-based detection (POCT) technique for SARS-CoV-2 specific antibodies has been described [ 52 ]. It can simultaneously detect SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG antibodies in the blood of infected patients within minutes, and can distinguish patients at different stages of the disease. The detection limits of IgG and IgM against SARS-CoV-2 virus were 0.6 ng/mL and 0.3 ng/mL, respectively, which can be rapidly detected by fingertip blood. In a study, a panel of 123 plasma samples from a COVID‐19 outbreak study population, preselected by semiquantitative anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 IgG testing, was used to assess the relationship between the novel quantitative ELISA (IgG) and a microneutralization assay [ 53 ].These results substantiate the implementation of the QuantiVac ELISA to assess protective immunity following infection or vaccination. In another study, a semi-stable mammalian episomal expression system was used to produce high quantities of the receptor-binding domain-RBD of SARS-CoV-2 [ 54 ]. The recombinant antigen was tested in an in-house IgG ELISA for COVID-19 with a panel of human sera. Thus, this serological test can be an attractive and inexpensive option in scenarios of limited resources to face the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the ELISA test has several problems that make it inappropriate sometimes. These problems include false negatives, noise responses from samples, nonspecific reactions because of improper plate cleaning, time-consuming, differences in reagent concentrations in prepared ELISA kits, high prices, and operator skills that trigger immunoassays, use ELISA readers and other associated equipment, and count exact amounts of antigens or antibodies.

3.2.6

Microfluidic chip
Several serological tests such as POCT and Assure have gained emergency use authorization (EUA) from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), including enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), chemiluminescence immunoassay and neutralization test. It is reliable [ 55 ], but needs analysis and determination by trained operators after hours or even days. On the other hand, faster detection methods (such as lateral flow analysis) are more conducive to the operation of the experimenter and provide accurate results, but only provide qualitative results [ 56 ]. Therefore, it is urgent to develop rapid, economical, and accurate detection methods.
In one study, optical microfluidic sensing platform for gold nanorods uses SARS-CoV-2 anti-S protein to bind to receptors, and the wavelength of the local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) peak of the gold nanostructure in the microfluidic device is shifted [ 57 ]. Shift correlation provides high-precision detection for the analysis of complex samples such as plasma or serum containing fibrinogen, globulin, etc. The label-free microfluidic platform reached the detection limit of 0.08 ng/mL (0.5Pm), which was within the clinically relevant concentration range [ 57 ]. Kim et al., propose an innovative method to detect SARS-CoV-2 using isothermal amplification of nucleic acids on a mesh containing multiple microfluidic pores ( Fig. 6 A) [ 58 ]. In short, templates were self-assembled to form an asymmetric dumbbell shape ( Fig. 6 B), and primers were immobilized on the nylon mesh surface ( Fig. 6 C). Templates were hybridized with primers immobilized on nylon mesh surface. When the template on the nylon-mesh surface hybridizes with a target pathogen ( Fig. 6 D), the template was ligated to form a closed-loop template. DNA hydrogel formation by COVID-19 template DNA ( Fig. 6 E). The hybridization of pathogen DNA and immobilized probes is amplified by rolling circles to form DNA hydrogels ( Fig. 6 F). The detection limit (LOD) of SARS-CoV-2 was determined to be 15 min and 0.7 Am ( Fig. 6 G). These results indicated rapid, easy, and effective detection with a moderate-sized LOD of the target pathogen by remote point-of-care testing. Many microfluidic platforms provide sustainable and timely detection tools to fill the gaps in standard serological detection and make the qualitative and quantitative diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 more accurate and cheaper.
Fig. 6 A microfluidic system to detect SARS-CoV-2 using a mesh-based RCA process (A) An explanatory schematic of the experimental setup for COVID-19 detection (B) Templates with primers immobilized on the nylon mesh surface are self-assembled to form an asymmetric dumbbell shape. (C) The templates are hybridized to the primers immobilized on the surface of the nylon mesh. (D) The template is ligated to form a closed loop template when the template hybridizes to the nylon mesh surface with a target pathogen (E). (F) Formation of DNA hydrogels from COVID-19 template DNA. (G)Heat-map for COVID-19 detection in terms of pathogen concentration and incubation time. Fig. 6

4

Prophylaxes

4.1

Vaccines
Vaccination is the most effective method to control SARS-CoV-2 and amount of things such as mRNA vaccine, Attenuated live vaccine, recombinant protein subunit vaccine to against it [ 24 , 59 ]. As of June 21, 2021, 287 vaccine candidates for SARS-CoV-2 had been reported and 102 were in clinical trials ( https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/draft-landscape-of-covid-19-candidate-vaccines ). Many SARS-CoV-2 vaccine candidates are in phase II testing, and some in phase III testing. China vaccine targets with RBD area S protein antigen selected new recombinant protein subunit vaccine, has completed phase II clinical trial, the stage is conducting clinical trials and clinical trials showed the vaccine has good tolerance and immunogenicity, and minor adverse reactions, the safety and immunogenicity data support Ⅲ phase of clinical trial with 25 (including g vaccination program, 3 times. To further evaluate safety and efficacy on a large scale [ 60 ]. The United States announced that two COVN mRNA vaccine clinical trials met the primary efficacy endpoint requirements, with protective efficacy of 94.1 % and 95.0 %, respectively, and consistent efficacy in different age, gender, and ethnic groups [ 61 ]. Another clinical trials of the vectored vaccine(ChAdOx1) developed in the United States found that two doses of immunity were better than one dose, in a phase I/II trial (randomized control), 1077 experimental participants produced neutralizing antibodies targeting SARS-CoV-2 after receiving the second vaccine injection, and the experiment proved that the second injection The interval of eight weeks is better than four weeks, and it's no side effects also prove its reliability [ 62 ].
Vaccination has helped the whole population build up an immune barrier (Detail in Table 1 ). However, in the battle against the virus in the future, human beings still need to create a more rigorous environment through scientific research and innovation to wear down the claws of the novel coronavirus. For example, to prevent future mutations of other sites in terms of drug resistance and environmental resistance of the novel coronavirus, drug research and development should have a broader perspective, and to develop novel coronavirus drugs with multiple mechanisms of action should be encouraged to avoid the generation of drug resistance caused by a single drug target.
Table 1 The latest on the use of vaccines. Table 1 Type Name Manufacturer Efficiency Untoward effect Virus vaccines CoronaVac Sinovac Research and Development Co. / Bell's palsy Encephalopathy Anaphylaxis Thromboembolic Guillain barre syndrome BBIBP-CorV Sinopharm + China National Biotec Group Co + Beijing Institute of Biological Products 79.34 % Dizziness Fatigue Headache Nausea Vomiting Allergic Dermatitis Fever Viral-vector vaccines Ad26.COV2. S Janssen Pharmaceutical by Johnson &amp; Johnson / Thrombosis with thrombocytopenia Guillain-Barre syndrome AZD122 (ChAdOx1-S)/Vaxzervria/CoviShield AstraZeneca + University of Oxford / Thrombocytopenia syndrome Capillary leak syndrome Myocarditis Pericarditis Anaphylaxis Guillain- Barre syndrome Nucleic-acid vaccines BNT162b2/Comirnaty Pfizer/BioNTech + Fosun Pharma 95 % Anaphylaxis Myocarditis Lymphadenopathy Appendicitis Herpes zoster infection Pericarditis Bell's palsy mRNA-1273/Spikevax Moderna + National Institute of Allergic and Infectious diseases 94 % Anaphylaxis Myocarditis Pericarditis Protein-based vaccines NVX-CoV2373 Novavax / Injection site reaction Pain Tenderness Erythema Swelling Fever Headache Fatigue Malaise Myalgia Arthralgia Nausea

5

Treatments for COVID-19
Up to now, only a few specific drugs have been approved to treat SARS-CoV-2. While many drug trials registered with the WHO, most of them are still in the experimental and clinical confirmation stage. Based on previous studies, the drugs used to treat COVID-19 are divided into several categories: interfering with virus recognition of ACE2 into cells; inhibiting RNA replication, synthesis, gene expression; broad-spectrum antiviral drugs; and vaccines etc. ( Fig. 7 ).
Fig. 7 Classification of therapeutic drugs for COVID-19. Fig. 7

5.1

Inhibit virus recognition of host ACE2
According to the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into the recipient cell needs ACE2 to bind to RBD, and after TMPRSS2 activation, furin protease cleavage and membrane fusion, therapeutic strategies can be divided into the following categories.

5.1.1

Blocking ACE2 receptor
It is proved that S protein is a protective antibody based on SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 specific binding to ACE2 [ 63 , 64 ], its binding capacity is 10–20 times that of SARS-CoV [ 14 ]. In addition, SARS-CoV down-regulates express ACE2 in recipient cells causing local lung injury [ 65 , 66 ]. S protein specific antibodies or ACE2 small molecule inhibitors can be designed to inhibit infect recipient cells. For example, a bacteriophage display library of SARS-CoV-2 S protein genome fragment (SARS-CoV-2 GFPDL) was used to analyze vaccine-induced antibody libraries to identify immunodominant epitopes in the S1, S1-RBD, and S2 domains. Also, these analyses showed that RBD immunogen had a 5-fold increase in affinity for ACE2 compared to other spike antigens, leading to higher antibody expression, and the best binding of their antibody to the target antigen [ 67 ]. However, some studies have shown that SARS-CoV polyclonal antibody can inhibit the entry of SARS-CoV S protein into cells, but not inhibit SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus particles [ 68 ].

5.1.2

Administration of exogenous soluble ACE2
ACE2 is a membrane-anchored protein with very low solubility in blood [ 69 ]. It has been proved in cell culture that soluble ACE2 fused with Ig can inhibit the infection of SARS-CoV-2 and S protein pseudovirus [ 63 ]. hrsACE-2 can inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in a dose-dependent manner, and hrsACE2 has been test in phase 1 and phase 2 clinical trial [ 70 ], and is considered as a potential treatment for COVID-19 [ 71 ]. Purified viral RNA was used in Vero E6 cells to culture as a reproduction marker, and each group of cells was washed and with different concentrations of hrsACE2. The results showed that clinical-grade hrsACE2 could reduce the growth rate of the SARS-CoV-2 in Vero cells by 1000–5000 times [ 72 ]. And, exogenous ACE2 negatively regulates the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and relieves lung damage [ 66 ]. Therefore, injection of hrsACE2 has emerged as a potential treatment for acute COVID-19 infection.

5.1.3

Inhibition of TMPRSS2
There is no binding active site between ACE2 and S protein itself, and the activation of S protein needs TMPRSS2 to start [ 9 , 73 ]. Camostat mesylate is a potent serine protease inhibitor, and its effectiveness has been demonstrated in vitro to significantly reduce to express SARS-CoV-2 in cells [ 9 ]. Complete inhibition was achieved when camostat mesylate and carbenicillinase inhibitor (E−64d) were added, and camostat mesylate had no cytotoxic effect [ 74 ]. Therefore, a similar compound may be considered for temporarily treatment of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2. According to data from ClinicalTrials.gov , there are currently 21 clinical trials on camostat. (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond = camostat+%20mesilate&amp;term = &amp;cntry = &amp;state = &amp;city = &amp;dist = ). One study showed that Nafamostat (intravenous formulation) and camostat (oral formulation) have been discussed as TMPRSS2 inhibitors. They also analyzed whether it was associated with a reduced risk of 30-day all-cause mortality in adults with COVID-19. Due to the number of available patients and enrolled patients meeting the primary outcome were small, the RCT evidence is inconclusive to determine whether there is a mortality reduction and safety with either nafamostat or camostat for the treatment of adults with COVID-19 [ 75 ]. A small-molecule compound, N-0385, has been identified and characterized by Shapira et al., which exhibits low nanomolar potency and a selectivity index of higher than 10 6 in inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.1.351 (Beta), P.1 (Gamma) and B.1.617.2 (Delta) [ 76 ]. Notably, in the K18-human ACE2 transgenic mouse model of severe COVID-19, N-0385 affords a high level of prophylactic and therapeutic benefit after multiple administrations or even after a single administration. That result indicates N-0385 provides an effective early treatment option against COVID-19 and emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern.

5.2

Inhibition of viral membrane fusion
Furin is a ubiquitous host calcium-dependent membrane-anchored protease. It activates the precursor protein by cleavage of the basic residue congruent sequence [ 77 ]. It is involved in many physiological and pathological processes, such as the inhibition of dengue virus, west nile virus and hepatitis B virus. Replication of viruses and many other viruses [ 78 , 79 ] makes it possible to inhibit the enzyme to control bacterial infections.
Experiments showed that to combine MI-701, oseltamivir, ribavirin, and other inhibitors of peptidofuran can inhibit furan, and long-term blocking of the enzyme may cause toxicity to the body [ 15 ]. In addition, Arbidol, an indole derivative, binds to the hydrophobic lumen of the hemagglutinin (HA) trimer, which is located at the distal end of the antigen-conserved epitope to which the neutralizing antibody binds. Arbidol can form hydrophobic interaction with the binding site, and cause certain conformational rearrangements, such as salt bridges, stabilize HA pre-fusion conformation, inhibit virus-mediated membrane fusion, and inhibit virus entry into cells [ 72 ]. Clinical trials demonstrated that the mortality of patients treated with arbidol (12 cases) was lower than that of the untreated group (6 cases) [ 80 ].Data from ClinicalTrials.gov shows that there are currently 14 clinical trials on Arbidol. (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond = &amp;term = Arbidol+&amp;cntry = &amp;state = &amp;city = &amp;dist = )

5.3

Inhibition of viral RNA synthesis
Based on viral RNA synthesis required for SARS-CoV-2 exocytosis, therapeutic strategies are divided into the following categories.

5.3.1

Nucleotide analogues inhibit SARS-CoV-2 mRNA synthesis
RdRp is a viral enzyme in the life cycle of RNA viruses. Nucleoside analogues in the form of adenine or guanine derivatives can target and bind to the viral RdRp, block the synthesis of viral nascent template RNA strands on a broad spectrum, and reduce viral replication [ 81 , 82 ]. It can be considered that various nucleotide analogues mRNA synthesis inhibitors, including hepatitis C virus (HCV), Zika virus (ZIKV) and coronavirus (CoVs), can also act on SARS-CoV-2 [ [83] , [84] , [85] ].Targeting experiments are conducted using different anti-polymerase drugs that have been approved for a variety of viruses on the market. The results showed that Ribavirin, Renzivir, Sofosbuvir, Galidevir, and Tenofovir are effective drugs against SARS-CoV-2 due to binding closely to RdRp. In addition, the results showed that guanosine derivatives (IDX-184), Setrobuvir, and YAK are the first choice for antiviral therapy, with potential against SARS-CoV-2 strains [ 86 , 87 ]. These drugs do not require toxicity measurement prior to FDA approval because of previous toxicology experiments. Molnupiravir is an antiviral drug with anti- RNA polymerase activity and currently is under investigation for the treatment of patients with COVID-19 [ 88 , 89 ]. In a cohort study, treatment with molnupiravir during the first five days of infection was found to significantly reduce the risk of PASC in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection who had at least one risk factor for progression to severe covid-19 compared to patients who did not receive treatment [ 90 ]. Similarly, another study confirmed that adding molnupiravir to routine care reduced COVID-19-related hospitalizations and deaths in this population, but it did not reduce the frequency of COVID-19-related hospitalizations or deaths among high-risk vaccinated adults in the community [ 91 ].
Remdesivir is an adenosine analogue that can integrate into the nascent viral RNA strand and cause it to terminate prematurely. It is shown that remdesivir covalently binds to the 3′ end of the viral RNA primer strand at the first base pair of viral RNA replication, resulting in termination of the non-mandatory RNA strand and inhibiting viral RdRp activity [ 92 ]. Currently, the effectiveness of remdesivir remains controversial. A single-arm sympathetic drug study based on 61 patients showed that 68 % of patients had clinical improvement [ 93 ]. While a randomized, open-label study based on 397 patients showed no significant difference between a 5-day course of desivir and the 7-day course of desivir treatment in Switzerland. Due to the trial did not have a placebo control group, the extent of benefit could not be determined [ 94 ]. So far, the data of ClinicalTrials.gov has included 85 clinical trials related to remdesivir. ( https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=&amp;term=remdesivir&amp;cntry=&amp;state=&amp;city=&amp;dist= )

5.3.2

CRISPR-Cas13d system inhibits SARS-CoV-2 mRNA synthesis
Most clinical vaccine trials are performed by the body's immune system to recognize the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 or to attenuate the virus and reduce the work of the virus to enter cells [ 95 , 96 ], while another system, CRISPR, that can identify and degrade the viral genome in the cell Can significantly inhibit SARS, IVA, IVB and other respiratory viruses [ 97 , 98 ].
A type 2 VI-D CRISPR-Cas13d system derived from Rumen coccus aureus XPD3002 combines its customized 22-nt spacer sequence with CRISPR-crRNA and Cas13d proteins to guide specific RNA molecules to target RNA degradation. Cas13d has a small size (2.8 kb), highly effective target and high catalytic rate, and shows high catalytic activity on SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid degradation and gene sequence expression inhibition in A549 cells, so Cas13d can be used as a new molecule A level approach to provide extensive pan-coronavirus protection against multiple viruses in the same family at the same time [ 98 , 99 ].The stable A549 cell line expressing Cas13d and co-expressing the mCherry marker was infected by lentivirus, using the SARS-CoV-2 strain and the conserved region between the SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV genomes: RdRP gene and N gene as reporter genes After crRNA pool transduction, A549 cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2. The results show that most crRNA pools targeting RdRP and N genes can inhibit to express the reporter gene to a certain extent compared to the control, and the difference in the ability of different crRNA pools to inhibit the SARS-CoV-2 reporter gene may be due to SARS-CoV −2 The inherent RNA secondary structure of genomic fragments or the binding affinity of each crRNA sequence is different [ 99 ].

5.4

Inhibition of translation maturity
The proteases M pro and PL pro are the key enzyme bodies for coronavirus replication, as well as the necessary proteases involved in the subsequent RNA transcription and translation of SARS-CoV-2. They are responsible for packaging polypeptides into proteins. The M pro of SARS-CoV-2 is highly like the M pro of SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, drugs can be screened based on the design of SARS-CoV M pro . Currently approved M pro protease inhibitors mainly include nirmatrelvir/ritonavir (Paxlovid), Ensitrelvir, lopinavir/ritonavir tablets, etc., because of its antiviral activity against SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, it is considered as a treatment at present means.
Previous studies predicted the SARS-CoV-2 M pro protease drug trial has identified two related protease inhibitors, lopinavir and ritonavir, as potential drug candidates, and multiple studies have shown that the triple combination of lopinavir, interferon 1β (IFN-1β) and ribavirin (ribavirin) is more effective than the single medication [ 100 ]. However, another study confirmed that lopinavir and ritonavir were inactive and cytotoxic against SARS-CoV-2 Mpro in the FRET assay. They are weak inhibitors of SARS-CoV M pro and do not act as inhibitors of M pro [ 101 ]. Six inhibitors including Nirmatrelvir, Ensitrelvir, Boceprevir, GC-376, Calcineurin inhibitor II, and XII were evaluated as inhibitors of the SARS-CoV-2 major protease (M pro ) in some studies reporting favorable results with good inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 virus replication [ [102] , [103] , [104] ]. First-generation therapeutics have improved clinical outcomes in patients infected with SARS-CoV-2. First-generation therapeutics have improved clinical outcomes in patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 [ 105 ]. Ensitrelvir (formerly S-217622), as a potential treatment for SARS-CoV-2 has been reported [ [106] , [107] , [108] ]. Ensitrelvir demonstrates strong in vitro antiviral activity against the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5. As the world's first coronavirus oral drug approved by the FDA, Paxlovid has attracted much attention since its birth [ [109] , [110] , [111] ]. In one study, researchers used population-based real-world data to evaluate the effectiveness of Paxlovid [ 112 ]. In 180,351 eligible patients, Paxlovid treatment or vaccination resulted in a significant reduction in the incidence or mortality from severe COVID-19. Meanwhile, the National Institutes of Health has conducted a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of Paxlovid that will evaluate the SARS-CoV-2 antiviral drug nirmatrelvir/ritonavir (Paxlovid) as a potential treatment for long-term COVID [ 113 ]. The above-mentioned drugs are current potential treatments. In the treatment of COVID-19, early treatment of lopinavir and ritonavir tablets can shorten the time of virus shedding [ 114 ]. However, a further double-blind randomized trial showed that there was no significant difference in clinical improvement or mortality or viral RNA load between the lopinavir ritonavir tablet group (99 cases) and the standard treatment group (100 cases). However, due to adverse reactions, 13.8 % Lopinavir ritonavir tablets treatment group patients stopped the drug at an early stage [ 115 ]. Lopinavir and ritonavir currently have 93 clinical trials.(https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond = COVID&amp;term = lopinavir%2Fritonavir&amp;cntry = &amp;state = &amp;city = &amp;dist = )
The SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease (PL pro ) mediates the cleavage of viral polyprotein as well as modulates the host innate immune response upon viral infection, rending it a promising antiviral drug target [ 116 ]. In addition, PL pro protease is not only involved in the process of viral protein translation and maturation, but also has deubiquitylation enzyme activity, which can inhibit host immune response and inhibit the PL pro activity related proteases [ 117 ]. Together with main protease (Mpro), PL pro is responsible for processing the viral replicase polyprotein into functional units. For example, many studies have reported that GRL-0617 inhibits viral replication of SARS-CoV-2 because its binding site and mode of inhibition are almost identical to that of SARS-CoV PL pro , and these results further consolidate the position of PLpro as a drug target for antiviral therapy of COVID-19 [ 11 , 12 , [117] , [118] , [119] , [120] ]. Therefore, it is an attractive target for antiviral drug development [ 12 , [121] , [122] , [123] ]. For example, Zhao et al., designed an approach using a SARS-CoV-2 PL pro inhibition activity as the primary screening tool for the discovery of the small molecule inhibitors, with a secondary cell-based assay for evaluation of their antiviral activity. Some compounds (YM155, cryptotanshinone, tanshinone I) that strongly inhibit SARS-CoV-2 PL pro were screened of over 6000 compounds [ 124 ]. However, in another study, many compounds, including YM155, cryptotanshinone, tanshinone I, dihydrotanshinone I, Tanshinone IIA, SJB2-043, 6-thioguanine, and 6-mercaptopurine, were shown to be ineffective. Thus, more efforts are needed to find effective and specific SARS-CoV-2 PL pro inhibitors [ 125 ]. Shen et al., leveraged the cooperativity of multiple shallow binding sites on the PL pro surface yielding novel 2phenylthiophenes with nanomolar inhibitory potency [ 126 ]. With slow off-rates, improved binding affinities, and low micromolar antiviral potency in SARS-CoV-2-infected human cells. This binding cooperativity translates to the most potent PL pro inhibitors. It is worth noting that the papain like protease (PL pro ) small molecule inhibitor HL-21 jointly developed by Professor He Wei of the School of Pharmacy of Tsinghua University has obtained the "Drug Clinical Trial Approval Notice", becoming the world's first PL pro inhibitor drug to enter clinical development. These analogues can be used as potential targeted therapeutic agents for SARS-CoV-2. A machine learning-driven discovery of a potent, selective, and orally available SARS-CoV-2 PL pro inhibitor based on the discovery of a lead compound, PF-07957472 (4), with strong efficacy in a mouse-adapted model of COVID-19 infection is shown in a recent study [ 127 ]. In the efficacy study, mice were infected 4 h prior to the first dose. They were dosed BID for four days, and then viral lung titers were measured. Compound 4 caused a statistically significant reduction in lung viral titers at four days post-infection for both the 50 and 150 mg/kg dose groups. This reduction occurred at unbound systemic exposures (Cmin) that maintained or exceeded the dNHBE EC90 throughout the dosing period. In a recent study, Wang et al. designed and synthesised 85 non-covalent PLpro inhibitors and revealed the interaction patterns of PLpro with eight lead compounds. In particular, the in vivo lead Jun 1, 2682 inhibited SARS-CoV-2 and its variants, including nirmatrelvir-resistant strains, with EC50s ranging from 0.44 to 2.02 μM. In a mouse model of SARS-CoV-2 infection, oral administration of Jun 1, 2682 increased survival and reduced viral load and lesions in the lungs, suggesting that PLpro inhibitors are promising oral antiviral candidates for SARS-CoV-2 [ 128 ].

5.5

Peptide inhibitors
Besides the development of small-molecule therapeutics that target viral proteases, there is also interest molecular tools to inhibit the initial event of viral attachment of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein to host ACE2 surface receptor [ 129 ]. For example, using peptide arrays, Chopra et al., developed an in vitro peptide inhibitor of the Spike-ACE2 interaction. That study highlights the utility of systematic peptide arrays as a platform for the development of coronavirus protein inhibitors [ 130 ]. In another study, yang et al., performed structural studies of the HR1HR2 bundle, and designed an extended HR2 peptide that achieves single-digit nanomolar inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 in cell-based and virus-based assays. The peptide also strongly inhibits all major SARS-CoV-2 variants to date [ 131 ]. Xia et al., developed a pan-coronavirus fusion inhibitor, EK1, which targeted the HR1 domain and could inhibit infection by divergent human coronaviruses tested, including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. One lipopeptide namely EK1C4, which is derived from EK1, was the most potent fusion inhibitor against SARS-CoV-2 S protein-mediated membrane fusion and pseudovirus infection with IC50s of 1.3 and 15.8 Nm. Mouse infection studies showed that EK1C4 can protect mice from infection [ 132 ]. Thijssen et al., used messenger RNA (mRNA) display under a reprogrammed genetic code to find a spike-targeting macrocyclic peptide (S1b3inL1) that inhibits SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan strain infection and pseudoviruses containing spike proteins of SARS-CoV-2 variants or related sarbecoviruses. The broadly active macrocyclic peptide S1b3inL1 described, as well as the new druggable site it reveals, demonstrates the power of in vitro selection technologies to provide alternative solutions to those offered by small molecules or biologicals [ 133 ].

5.6

Broad-spectrum

5.6.1

Chloroquine
Chloroquine is a broad-spectrum drug against malaria and autoimmune disease. According to research reports, chloroquine can effectively inhibit the replication of avian influenza virus H5N1 and influenza B virus [ 134 ]. Some studies have shown that chloroquine can inhibit the SARS-CoV-2 in vitro. Recent experimental studies have shown that oral chloroquine has an EC90 of 6.90 μmol/L for SARS-CoV-2 in Vero. It influences the invasion and post-invasion stages of SARS-CoV-2 infection in Vero E6 cells. At the same time, the severity, antipyretic phenomenon, lung imaging improvement time, negative transformation time and viral nucleic acid transfer rate of patients treated with chloroquine were all better than those in the control group, which could shorten the course of disease. In addition, chloroquine phosphate has been found to be effective against COVID-19. In addition to this activity, chloroquine is based on the ability to regulate the immune system and can cooperate with other cells in the body to enhance resistance to viruses [ 135 ]. However, a multi-center study based on 14,888 patients showed that neither chloroquine nor hydroxychloroquine would be beneficial to patient outcomes, and the study was withdrawn due to insufficient sample information [ 136 ]. There are currently 92 clinical trials on chloroquine. However, it is necessary to expand the scope of clinical trials to further verify this conclusion. Further, the specific mechanism of chloroquine on the novel coronavirus needs further research. (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond = covid&amp;term = chloroquine&amp;cntry = &amp;state = &amp;city = &amp;dist = ).

5.6.2

Interferon
Both viral and host factors influence the outcome of IFN signal transduction. IFN signal transduction may be a threat to patients because of its virus-mediated systemic pro-inflammatory effects [ 137 ]. And whether the IFN response is protective or pathogenic in SARS and MERS depends on the environment in which IFN signals are induced. Its inhibitory effect has been demonstrated in various animal models [ 138 , 139 ].
According to previous reports, compared with the infection of Influenza Viruses (IAV), IFN-α and interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) are delayed in induction of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection [ 140 ]. While in the cohort of COVID-19 patients, the IFN-α and ISG levels correlated with viral load. The quantity is a function of the seriousness of the disease. Serious infections can cause elevated IFN signals, but cannot reduce the viral load. At the same time, studies have shown that SARS-CoV can inhibit the production of type I interferon, which leads to the activation of pro-inflammatory mononuclear macrophages and cytokines in the lungs, resulting lung injury. The virus also inhibits the transduction of interferon signals and increases interference. Besides, in most studies, all patients received interferon therapy [ 141 , 142 ], so it is impossible to decide whether the efficacy comes from interferon or other drugs or the result of the disease itself.

5.7

Chinese medicine
Traditional Chinese medicine has achieved good results in treating infectious diseases [ 143 ]. During China's fight against the disease, 92 percent of confirmed COVID-19 cases received integrated treatment with traditional Chinese and western medicine, and more than 90 percent responded effectively to treatment or showed significant improvement [ [144] , [145] , [146] , [147] ]. For patients with mild to moderate disease, early intervention with traditional Chinese medicine has been shown to be effective in preventing the disease from transitioning to severe and critical conditions. In severe cases, TCM can help stabilize the condition and extend the treatment window. In China's fight against COVID-19, six TCM prescriptions - JHQG, LHQW, XFBD, HSBD, XBJ and LCDD - have proved to be the most effective in treating COVID-19 patients. These ingredients may play a therapeutic role in treating COVID-19 by targeting ACE2, 3CLpro and IL-6. Among them, Jinhua Qinggan Granules and Lianhua Qingwen capsules are recommended for the treatment of patients under medical observation/in the early stage of disease development with fatigue and fever as the main clinical manifestations [ 148 , 149 ]. Qingfei Detoxification Decoction is recommended to treat moderately and severely infected patients; Xuanfeihuadu granules are recommended to treat moderate cases; Huashuifengdu granules and Xuebijing are recommended for the treatment of severe cases (novel coronavirus pneumonia). Therefore, the key active ingredients in TCM compounds and the molecular mechanisms that drive the therapeutic effect of COVID-19 deserve further study to help better manage this devastating disease.

6

Conclusions
The COVID-19 pandemic, which broke out in December 2019, has continued to ravage the world, causing huge losses in production and life. There are still a lot of issues that we need know of, and many difficulties in developing antiviral drugs; Whether the special furin site is one reasons for the strong infectiousness of SARS-CoV-2. Whether protease action can be ignored for S protein-dependent endocytosis; Whether there is a faster, simpler and more economical method for detecting SARS-CoV-2; The variability of SARS-CoV-2 single-stranded RNA makes it difficult for inhibitors and specific monoclonal antibodies to function; Whether some treatment methods based on clinical small sample studies, such as plasma, antibody infusion, interferon, etc. can pass clinical RCT research; And the issue of is most concern: to develop various SARS-CoV-2 vaccines, there are still many problems. Due to the global pandemic and the variability of the COVID-19 epidemic, their development faces both opportunities and challenges. Although many targeted drug research and clinical trials for SARS-CoV-2 have laid a solid foundation for the treatment of COVID-19. What we need to be wary of is that, assuming the initial success of vaccines, the SARS-CoV-2 may come back due to the emergence of subtypes and mutations of the virus or even become a seasonal epidemic. It is worth noting that while the scientific community has developed several therapeutic monoclonal antibodies and small molecule drugs for clinical use over the past four years or so of the COVID-19 pandemic, it cannot be ignored that continued viral transmission, ongoing evolution and increasing selective pressures have the potential to generate viral variants that are resistant to these interventions [ 150 , 151 ]. This also leads to viruses capable of becoming resistant to antiviral drugs. This is exacerbated by the fact that in vitro and in vivo resistance has been reported for almost all licensed or approved SARS-CoV-2 therapeutic antivirals. Some drug-resistant variants exist before these drugs enter the human body and can spread [ 104 ]. Therefore, subsequent concerted efforts by the scientific community are needed to monitor resistance variants and to develop more protease inhibitors and other antiviral drugs with different mechanisms of action and resistance profiles for combination therapy.

Funding
This work was supported by Zhejiang Provincial Health Major Science and Technology Program ( WKJ-ZJ-2434 ), and 10.13039/501100004731 Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China ( #LTGY23H160001 , #2018ZX10711001 ) and Key Laboratory of Biomarkers and In Vitro Diagnosis Translation of Zhejiang province ( KFJJ2023012 ).

Data availability statement
Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

Additional information
No additional information is available for this paper.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yang Li: Writing – original draft, Data curation. Si-Ming Lu: Writing – original draft, Conceptualization. Jia-Long Wang: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Hang-Ping Yao: Writing – review &amp; editing, Funding acquisition. Li-Guo Liang: Writing – review &amp; editing, Investigation, Funding acquisition.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References

References
1
Zhou P. Yang X.L. Wang X.G. Hu B. Zhang L. Zhang W. Si H.R. Zhu Y. Li B. Huang C.L. Chen H.D. Chen J. Luo Y. Guo H. Jiang R.D. Liu M.Q. Chen Y. Shen X.R. Wang X. Zheng X.S. Zhao K. Chen Q.J. Deng F. Liu L.L. Yan B. Zhan F.X. Wang Y.Y. Xiao G.F. Shi Z.L. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin Nature 579 7798 2020 270 273 32015507 10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7 PMC7095418 2
Lu R. Zhao X. Li J. Niu P. Yang B. Wu H. Wang W. Song H. Huang B. Zhu N. Bi Y. Ma X. Zhan F. Wang L. Hu T. Zhou H. Hu Z. Zhou W. Zhao L. Chen J. Meng Y. Wang J. Lin Y. Yuan J. Xie Z. Ma J. Liu W.J. Wang D. Xu W. Holmes E.C. Gao G.F. Wu G. Chen W. Shi W. Tan W. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding Lancet 395 10224 2020 565 574 32007145 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30251-8 PMC7159086 3
Blanco-Melo D. Nilsson-Payant B.E. Liu W.C. Uhl S. Hoagland D. Moller R. Jordan T.X. Oishi K. Panis M. Sachs D. Wang T.T. Schwartz R.E. Lim J.K. Albrecht R.A. tenOever B.R. Imbalanced host response to SARS-CoV-2 drives development of COVID-19 Cell 181 5 2020 1036 1045 e9 32416070 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026 PMC7227586 4
Zhang H. Rostami M.R. Leopold P.L. Mezey J.G. O'Beirne S.L. Strulovici-Barel Y. Crystal R.G. Expression of the SARS-CoV-2 ACE2 receptor in the human airway epithelium Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 202 2 2020 219 229 32432483 10.1164/rccm.202003-0541OC PMC7365377 5
Blume C. Jackson C.L. Spalluto C.M. Legebeke J. Nazlamova L. Conforti F. Perotin J.M. Frank M. Butler J. Crispin M. Coles J. Thompson J. Ridley R.A. Dean L.S.N. Loxham M. Reikine S. Azim A. Tariq K. Johnston D.A. Skipp P.J. Djukanovic R. Baralle D. McCormick C.J. Davies D.E. Lucas J.S. Wheway G. Mennella V. A novel ACE2 isoform is expressed in human respiratory epithelia and is upregulated in response to interferons and RNA respiratory virus infection Nat. Genet. 53 2 2021 205 214 33432184 10.1038/s41588-020-00759-x 6
Hamming I. Timens W. Bulthuis M.L. Lely A.T. Navis G. van Goor H. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis J. Pathol. 203 2 2004 631 637 15141377 10.1002/path.1570 PMC7167720 7
V. Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2 Nat Microbiol 5 4 2020 536 544 32123347 10.1038/s41564-020-0695-z PMC7095448 8
Xue X. Yu H. Yang H. Xue F. Wu Z. Shen W. Li J. Zhou Z. Ding Y. Zhao Q. Zhang X.C. Liao M. Bartlam M. Rao Z. Structures of two coronavirus main proteases: implications for substrate binding and antiviral drug design J. Virol. 82 5 2008 2515 2527 18094151 10.1128/JVI.02114-07 PMC2258912 9
Hoffmann M. Kleine-Weber H. Schroeder S. Kruger N. Herrler T. Erichsen S. Schiergens T.S. Herrler G. Wu N.H. Nitsche A. Muller M.A. Drosten C. Pohlmann S. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor Cell 181 2 2020 271 280 e8 32142651 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052 PMC7102627 10
Shang J. Ye G. Shi K. Wan Y. Luo C. Aihara H. Geng Q. Auerbach A. Li F. Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2 Nature 581 7807 2020 221 224 32225175 10.1038/s41586-020-2179-y PMC7328981 11
Fu Z. Huang B. Tang J. Liu S. Liu M. Ye Y. Liu Z. Xiong Y. Zhu W. Cao D. Li J. Niu X. Zhou H. Zhao Y.J. Zhang G. Huang H. The complex structure of GRL0617 and SARS-CoV-2 PLpro reveals a hot spot for antiviral drug discovery Nat. Commun. 12 1 2021 488 33473130 10.1038/s41467-020-20718-8 PMC7817691 12
Shin D. Mukherjee R. Grewe D. Bojkova D. Baek K. Bhattacharya A. Schulz L. Widera M. Mehdipour A.R. Tascher G. Geurink P.P. Wilhelm A. van der Heden van Noort G.J. Ovaa H. Muller S. Knobeloch K.P. Rajalingam K. Schulman B.A. Cinatl J. Hummer G. Ciesek S. Dikic I. Papain-like protease regulates SARS-CoV-2 viral spread and innate immunity Nature 587 7835 2020 657 662 32726803 10.1038/s41586-020-2601-5 PMC7116779 13
Walls A.C. Park Y.J. Tortorici M.A. Wall A. McGuire A.T. Veesler D. Structure, function, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein Cell 181 2 2020 281 292 e6 32155444 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058 PMC7102599 14
Liu C. Zhou Q. Li Y. Garner L.V. Watkins S.P. Carter L.J. Smoot J. Gregg A.C. Daniels A.D. Jervey S. Albaiu D. Research and development on therapeutic agents and vaccines for COVID-19 and related human coronavirus diseases ACS Cent. Sci. 6 3 2020 315 331 32226821 10.1021/acscentsci.0c00272 PMC10467574 15
Sarac M.S. Cameron A. Lindberg I. The furin inhibitor hexa-D-arginine blocks the activation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A in vivo Infect. Immun. 70 12 2002 7136 7139 12438396 10.1128/IAI.70.12.7136-7139.2002 PMC133042 16
Yan L. Zhang Y. Ge J. Zheng L. Gao Y. Wang T. Jia Z. Wang H. Huang Y. Li M. Wang Q. Rao Z. Lou Z. Architecture of a SARS-CoV-2 mini replication and transcription complex Nat. Commun. 11 1 2020 5874 33208736 10.1038/s41467-020-19770-1 PMC7675986 17
te Velthuis A.J. Arnold J.J. Cameron C.E. van den Worm S.H. Snijder E.J. The RNA polymerase activity of SARS-coronavirus nsp12 is primer dependent Nucleic Acids Res. 38 1 2010 203 214 19875418 10.1093/nar/gkp904 PMC2800238 18
Neufeld L. Yeini E. Pozzi S. Satchi-Fainaro R. 3D bioprinted cancer models: from basic biology to drug development Nat. Rev. Cancer 22 12 2022 679 692 36280768 10.1038/s41568-022-00514-w 19
Chimene D. Kaunas R. Gaharwar A.K. Hydrogel bioink reinforcement for additive manufacturing: a focused review of emerging strategies Adv. Mater. 32 1 2020 e1902026 10.1002/adma.201902026 31599073 20
Hilgenfeld R. From SARS to MERS: crystallographic studies on coronaviral proteases enable antiviral drug design FEBS J. 281 18 2014 4085 4096 25039866 10.1111/febs.12936 PMC7163996 21
Shi J. Song J. The catalysis of the SARS 3C-like protease is under extensive regulation by its extra domain FEBS J. 273 5 2006 1035 1045 16478476 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2006.05130.x PMC7164011 22
Awad A. Madla C.M. McCoubrey L.E. Ferraro F. Gavins F.K.H. Buanz A. Gaisford S. Orlu M. Siepmann F. Siepmann J. Basit A.W. Clinical translation of advanced colonic drug delivery technologies Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 181 2022 114076 10.1016/j.addr.2021.114076 34890739 23
Song J.Y. Yun J.G. Noh J.Y. Cheong H.J. Kim W.J. Covid-19 in South Korea - challenges of subclinical manifestations N. Engl. J. Med. 382 19 2020 1858 1859 32251568 10.1056/NEJMc2001801 PMC7154984 24
Huang C. Wang Y. Li X. Ren L. Zhao J. Hu Y. Zhang L. Fan G. Xu J. Gu X. Cheng Z. Yu T. Xia J. Wei Y. Wu W. Xie X. Yin W. Li H. Liu M. Xiao Y. Gao H. Guo L. Xie J. Wang G. Jiang R. Gao Z. Jin Q. Wang J. Cao B. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China Lancet 395 10223 2020 497 506 31986264 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5 PMC7159299 25
Chen G. Wu D. Guo W. Cao Y. Huang D. Wang H. Wang T. Zhang X. Chen H. Yu H. Zhang X. Zhang M. Wu S. Song J. Chen T. Han M. Li S. Luo X. Zhao J. Ning Q. Clinical and immunological features of severe and moderate coronavirus disease 2019 J. Clin. Invest. 130 5 2020 2620 2629 32217835 10.1172/JCI137244 PMC7190990 26
Rodriguez-Morales A.J. Cardona-Ospina J.A. Gutierrez-Ocampo E. Villamizar-Pena R. Holguin-Rivera Y. Escalera-Antezana J.P. Alvarado-Arnez L.E. Bonilla-Aldana D.K. Franco-Paredes C. Henao-Martinez A.F. Paniz-Mondolfi A. Lagos-Grisales G.J. Ramirez-Vallejo E. Suarez J.A. Zambrano L.I. Villamil-Gomez W.E. Balbin-Ramon G.J. Rabaan A.A. Harapan H. Dhama K. Nishiura H. Kataoka H. Ahmad T. Sah R. C.-R.E a.h.w.l.o Latin American Network of Coronavirus Disease, Clinical, laboratory and imaging features of COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis Trav. Med. Infect. Dis. 34 2020 101623 10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101623 PMC7102608 32179124 27
Wang D. Hu B. Hu C. Zhu F. Liu X. Zhang J. Wang B. Xiang H. Cheng Z. Xiong Y. Zhao Y. Li Y. Wang X. Peng Z. Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia in wuhan, China JAMA 323 11 2020 1061 1069 32031570 10.1001/jama.2020.1585 PMC7042881 28
Maurea S. Bombace C. Mainolfi C.G. Annunziata A. Attanasio L. Stanzione A. Matano E. Mucci B. D'Ambrosio A. Giordano C. Petretta M. Del Vecchio S. Cuocolo A. Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on 2-[(18)F]FDG PET/CT imaging work-flow in a single medical institution: comparison among the three Italian waves Heliyon 8 1 2022 e08819 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e08819 PMC8783536 35097234 29
Stanzione A. Ponsiglione A. Cuocolo R. Rumolo M. Santarsiere M. Scotto R. Viceconte G. Imbriaco M. Maurea S. Camera L. Gentile I. Brunetti A. Chest CT in COVID-19 patients: structured vs conventional reporting Eur. J. Radiol. 138 2021 109621 10.1016/j.ejrad.2021.109621 PMC7917443 33677417 30
Romeo V. Stanzione A. D'Auria D. Fulgione L. Giusto F. Maurea S. Brunetti A. COVID-19 vaccine-induced lymphadenopathies: incidence, course and imaging features from an ultrasound prospective study J Ultrasound 25 4 2022 965 971 35507248 10.1007/s40477-022-00674-3 PMC9064721 31
Sgamato C. Rocco A. Compare D. Minieri S. Marchitto S.A. Maurea S. Nardone G. Autoimmune liver diseases and SARS-CoV-2 World J. Gastroenterol. 29 12 2023 1838 1851 37032727 10.3748/wjg.v29.i12.1838 PMC10080695 32
Tang Y.W. Schmitz J.E. Persing D.H. Stratton C.W. Laboratory diagnosis of COVID-19: current issues and challenges J. Clin. Microbiol. 58 6 2020 10.1128/JCM.00512-20 PMC7269383 32245835 33
Guan W.J. Ni Z.Y. Hu Y. Liang W.H. Ou C.Q. He J.X. Liu L. Shan H. Lei C.L. Hui D.S.C. Du B. Li L.J. Zeng G. Yuen K.Y. Chen R.C. Tang C.L. Wang T. Chen P.Y. Xiang J. Li S.Y. Wang J.L. Liang Z.J. Peng Y.X. Wei L. Liu Y. Hu Y.H. Peng P. Wang J.M. Liu J.Y. Chen Z. Li G. Zheng Z.J. Qiu S.Q. Luo J. Ye C.J. Zhu S.Y. Zhong N.S. C. China Medical Treatment Expert Group for Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China N. Engl. J. Med. 382 18 2020 1708 1720 32109013 10.1056/NEJMoa2002032 PMC7092819 34
Dora A.V. Winnett A. Jatt L.P. Davar K. Watanabe M. Sohn L. Kern H.S. Graber C.J. Goetz M.B. Universal and serial laboratory testing for SARS-CoV-2 at a long-term care skilled nursing facility for veterans - Los Angeles, California MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 69 21 2020 651 655 2020 32463809 10.15585/mmwr.mm6921e1 PMC7269604 35
Smyrlaki I. Ekman M. Lentini A. Rufino de Sousa N. Papanicolaou N. Vondracek M. Aarum J. Safari H. Muradrasoli S. Rothfuchs A.G. Albert J. Hogberg B. Reinius B. Massive and rapid COVID-19 testing is feasible by extraction-free SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR Nat. Commun. 11 1 2020 4812 32968075 10.1038/s41467-020-18611-5 PMC7511968 36
Barak N. Ben-Ami R. Sido T. Perri A. Shtoyer A. Rivkin M. Licht T. Peretz A. Magenheim J. Fogel I. Livneh A. Daitch Y. Oiknine-Djian E. Benedek G. Dor Y. Wolf D.G. Yassour M. Hebrew University-Hadassah C.-D.T. Lessons from applied large-scale pooling of 133,816 SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR tests Sci. Transl. Med. 13 589 2021 10.1126/scitranslmed.abf2823 PMC8099176 33619081 37
Zhang Y. Xu Y. Simon-Masseron A. Lalevée J. Radical photoinitiation with LEDs and applications in the 3D printing of composites Chem. Soc. Rev. 50 6 2021 3824 3841 33523055 10.1039/d0cs01411g 38
You S. Xiang Y. Hwang H.H. Berry D.B. Kiratitanaporn W. Guan J. Yao E. Tang M. Zhong Z. Ma X. Wangpraseurt D. Sun Y. Lu T.Y. Chen S. High cell density and high-resolution 3D bioprinting for fabricating vascularized tissues Sci. Adv. 9 8 2023 eade7923 10.1126/sciadv.ade7923 PMC9946358 36812321 39
Chotiwan N. Brewster C.D. Magalhaes T. Weger-Lucarelli J. Duggal N.K. Ruckert C. Nguyen C. Garcia Luna S.M. Fauver J.R. Andre B. Gray M. Black W.C.t. Kading R.C. Ebel G.D. Kuan G. Balmaseda A. Jaenisch T. Marques E.T.A. Brault A.C. Harris E. Foy B.D. Quackenbush S.L. Perera R. Rovnak J. Rapid and specific detection of asian- and african-lineage Zika viruses Sci. Transl. Med. 9 388 2017 10.1126/scitranslmed.aag0538 PMC5654541 28469032 40
Fomsgaard A.S. Rosenstierne M.W. An alternative workflow for molecular detection of SARS-CoV-2 - escape from the NA extraction kit-shortage, Copenhagen, Denmark, March 2020 Euro Surveill. 25 14 2020 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.14.2000398 PMC7160440 32290902 41
Dao Thi V.L. Herbst K. Boerner K. Meurer M. Kremer L.P. Kirrmaier D. Freistaedter A. Papagiannidis D. Galmozzi C. Stanifer M.L. Boulant S. Klein S. Chlanda P. Khalid D. Barreto Miranda I. Schnitzler P. Kräusslich H.G. Knop M. Anders S. A colorimetric RT-LAMP assay and LAMP-sequencing for detecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA in clinical samples Sci. Transl. Med. 12 556 2020 10.1126/scitranslmed.abc7075 PMC7574920 32719001 42
Bokelmann L. Nickel O. Maricic T. Paabo S. Meyer M. Borte S. Riesenberg S. Point-of-care bulk testing for SARS-CoV-2 by combining hybridization capture with improved colorimetric LAMP Nat. Commun. 12 1 2021 1467 33674580 10.1038/s41467-021-21627-0 PMC7935920 43
Rabe B.A. Cepko C. SARS-CoV-2 detection using isothermal amplification and a rapid, inexpensive protocol for sample inactivation and purification Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117 39 2020 24450 24458 32900935 10.1073/pnas.2011221117 PMC7533677 44
Behrmann O. Bachmann I. Spiegel M. Schramm M. Abd El Wahed A. Dobler G. Dame G. Hufert F.T. Rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2 by low volume real-time single tube reverse transcription recombinase polymerase amplification using an exo probe with an internally linked quencher (Exo-IQ) Clin. Chem. 66 8 2020 1047 1054 32384153 10.1093/clinchem/hvaa116 PMC7239256 45
Myhrvold C. Freije C.A. Gootenberg J.S. Abudayyeh O.O. Metsky H.C. Durbin A.F. Kellner M.J. Tan A.L. Paul L.M. Parham L.A. Garcia K.F. Barnes K.G. Chak B. Mondini A. Nogueira M.L. Isern S. Michael S.F. Lorenzana I. Yozwiak N.L. MacInnis B.L. Bosch I. Gehrke L. Zhang F. Sabeti P.C. Field-deployable viral diagnostics using CRISPR-Cas13 Science 360 6387 2018 444 448 29700266 10.1126/science.aas8836 PMC6197056 46
Zucha D. Androvic P. Kubista M. Valihrach L. Performance comparison of reverse transcriptases for single-cell studies Clin. Chem. 66 1 2020 217 228 31699702 10.1373/clinchem.2019.307835 47
Dehbandi R. Zazouli M.A. Stability of SARS-CoV-2 in different environmental conditions The Lancet Microbe 1 4 2020 10.1016/S2666-5247(20)30093-8 PMC7833680 33521711 48
Qian J. Boswell S.A. Chidley C. Lu Z.X. Pettit M.E. Gaudio B.L. Fajnzylber J.M. Ingram R.T. Ward R.H. Li J.Z. Springer M. An enhanced isothermal amplification assay for viral detection Nat. Commun. 11 1 2020 5920 33219228 10.1038/s41467-020-19258-y PMC7679446 49
Andrey D.O. Cohen P. Meyer B. Torriani G. Yerly S. Mazza L. Calame A. Arm-Vernez I. Guessous I. Stringhini S. Roux-Lombard P. Fontao L. Agoritsas T. Stirnemann J. Reny J.L. Siegrist C.A. Eckerle I. Kaiser L. Vuilleumier N. Diagnostic accuracy of Augurix COVID-19 IgG serology rapid test Eur. J. Clin. Invest. 50 10 2020 e13357 10.1111/eci.13357 PMC7404380 32691863 50
Krammer F. Simon V. Serology assays to manage COVID-19 Science 368 6495 2020 1060 1061 32414781 10.1126/science.abc1227 51
Lisboa Bastos M. Tavaziva G. Abidi S.K. Campbell J.R. Haraoui L.P. Johnston J.C. Lan Z. Law S. MacLean E. Trajman A. Menzies D. Benedetti A. Ahmad Khan F. Diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for covid-19: systematic review and meta-analysis Bmj 370 2020 m2516 32611558 10.1136/bmj.m2516 PMC7327913 52
Xu W. Song D. Liu J. Han X. Xu J. Zhu A. Long F. Development of chemiluminescent lab-on-fiber immunosensors for rapid point-of-care testing of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and evaluation of longitudinal immune response kinetics following three-dose inactivation virus vaccination J. Med. Virol. 95 1 2023 e28190 10.1002/jmv.28190 PMC9539144 36180404 53
Dolscheid-Pommerich R. Bartok E. Renn M. Kümmerer B.M. Schulte B. Schmithausen R.M. Stoffel-Wagner B. Streeck H. Saschenbrecker S. Steinhagen K. Hartmann G. Correlation between a quantitative anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG ELISA and neutralization activity J. Med. Virol. 94 1 2022 388 392 34415572 10.1002/jmv.27287 PMC8426838 54
Villafañe L. Vaulet L.G. Viere F.M. Klepp L.I. Forrellad M.A. Bigi M.M. Romano M.I. Magistrelli G. Fermepin M.R. Bigi F. Development and evaluation of a low cost IgG ELISA test based in RBD protein for COVID-19 J. Immunol. Methods 500 2022 113182 10.1016/j.jim.2021.113182 PMC8574101 34762914 55
Muruato A.E. Fontes-Garfias C.R. Ren P. Garcia-Blanco M.A. Menachery V.D. Xie X. Shi P.-Y. A high-throughput neutralizing antibody assay for COVID-19 diagnosis and vaccine evaluation Nat. Commun. 11 1 2020 10.1038/s41467-020-17892-0 PMC7426916 32792628 56
Carter L.J. Garner L.V. Smoot J.W. Li Y. Zhou Q. Saveson C.J. Sasso J.M. Gregg A.C. Soares D.J. Beskid T.R. Jervey S.R. Liu C. Assay techniques and test development for COVID-19 diagnosis ACS Cent. Sci. 6 5 2020 591 605 32382657 10.1021/acscentsci.0c00501 PMC7197457 57
Funari R. Chu K.Y. Shen A.Q. Detection of antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein by gold nanospikes in an opto-microfluidic chip Biosens. Bioelectron. 169 2020 112578 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112578 PMC7467868 32911317 58
Kim H.S. Abbas N. Shin S. A rapid diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 using DNA hydrogel formation on microfluidic pores Biosens. Bioelectron. 177 2021 113005 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113005 PMC7813512 33486135 59
Mehta P. McAuley D.F. Brown M. Sanchez E. Tattersall R.S. Manson J.J. COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression Lancet 395 10229 2020 1033 1034 32192578 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30628-0 PMC7270045 60
Yang S. Li Y. Dai L. Wang J. He P. Li C. Fang X. Wang C. Zhao X. Huang E. Wu C. Zhong Z. Wang F. Duan X. Tian S. Wu L. Liu Y. Luo Y. Chen Z. Li F. Li J. Yu X. Ren H. Liu L. Meng S. Yan J. Hu Z. Gao L. Gao G.F. Safety and immunogenicity of a recombinant tandem-repeat dimeric RBD-based protein subunit vaccine (ZF2001) against COVID-19 in adults: two randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 and 2 trials Lancet Infect. Dis. 21 8 2021 1107 1119 33773111 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00127-4 PMC7990482 61
Polack F.P. Thomas S.J. Kitchin N. Absalon J. Gurtman A. Lockhart S. Perez J.L. Perez Marc G. Moreira E.D. Zerbini C. Bailey R. Swanson K.A. Roychoudhury S. Koury K. Li P. Kalina W.V. Cooper D. Frenck R.W. Jr. Hammitt L.L. Tureci O. Nell H. Schaefer A. Unal S. Tresnan D.B. Mather S. Dormitzer P.R. Sahin U. Jansen K.U. Gruber W.C. Group C.C.T. Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA covid-19 vaccine N. Engl. J. Med. 383 27 2020 2603 2615 33301246 10.1056/NEJMoa2034577 PMC7745181 62
Folegatti P.M. Ewer K.J. Aley P.K. Angus B. Becker S. Belij-Rammerstorfer S. Bellamy D. Bibi S. Bittaye M. Clutterbuck E.A. Dold C. Faust S.N. Finn A. Flaxman A.L. Hallis B. Heath P. Jenkin D. Lazarus R. Makinson R. Minassian A.M. Pollock K.M. Ramasamy M. Robinson H. Snape M. Tarrant R. Voysey M. Green C. Douglas A.D. Hill A.V.S. Lambe T. Gilbert S.C. Pollard A.J. Aboagye J. Adams K. Ali A. Allen E. Allison J.L. Anslow R. Arbe-Barnes E.H. Babbage G. Baillie K. Baker M. Baker N. Baker P. Baleanu I. Ballaminut J. Barnes E. Barrett J. Bates L. Batten A. Beadon K. Beckley R. Berrie E. Berry L. Beveridge A. Bewley K.R. Bijker E.M. Bingham T. Blackwell L. Blundell C.L. Bolam E. Boland E. Borthwick N. Bower T. Boyd A. Brenner T. Bright P.D. Brown-O'Sullivan C. Brunt E. Burbage J. Burge S. Buttigieg K.R. Byard N. Cabera Puig I. Calvert A. Camara S. Cao M. Cappuccini F. Carr M. Carroll M.W. Carter V. Cathie K. Challis R.J. Charlton S. Chelysheva I. Cho J.-S. Cicconi P. Cifuentes L. Clark H. Clark E. Cole T. Colin-Jones R. Conlon C.P. Cook A. Coombes N.S. Cooper R. Cosgrove C.A. Coy K. Crocker W.E.M. Cunningham C.J. Damratoski B.E. Dando L. Datoo M.S. Davies H. De Graaf H. Demissie T. Di Maso C. Dietrich I. Dong T. Donnellan F.R. Douglas N. Downing C. Drake J. Drake-Brockman R. Drury R.E. Dunachie S.J. Edwards N.J. Edwards F.D.L. Edwards C.J. Elias S.C. Elmore M.J. Emary K.R.W. English M.R. Fagerbrink S. Felle S. Feng S. Field S. Fixmer C. Fletcher C. Ford K.J. Fowler J. Fox P. Francis E. Frater J. Furze J. Fuskova M. Galiza E. Gbesemete D. Gilbride C. Godwin K. Gorini G. Goulston L. Grabau C. Gracie L. Gray Z. Guthrie L.B. Hackett M. Halwe S. Hamilton E. Hamlyn J. Hanumunthadu B. Harding I. Harris S.A. Harris A. Harrison D. Harrison C. Hart T.C. Haskell L. Hawkins S. Head I. Henry J.A. Hill J. Hodgson S.H.C. Hou M.M. Howe E. Howell N. Hutlin C. Ikram S. Isitt C. Iveson P. Jackson S. Jackson F. James S.W. Jenkins M. Jones E. Jones K. Jones C.E. Jones B. Kailath R. Karampatsas K. Keen J. Kelly S. Kelly D. Kerr D. Kerridge S. Khan L. Khan U. Killen A. Kinch J. King T.B. King L. King J. Kingham-Page L. Klenerman P. Knapper F. Knight J.C. Knott D. Koleva S. Kupke A. Larkworthy C.W. Larwood J.P.J. Laskey A. Lawrie A.M. Lee A. Ngan Lee K.Y. Lees E.A. Legge H. Lelliott A. Lemm N.-M. Lias A.M. Linder A. Lipworth S. Liu X. Liu S. Lopez Ramon R. Lwin M. Mabesa F. Madhavan M. Mallett G. Mansatta K. Marcal I. Marinou S. Marlow E. Marshall J.L. Martin J. McEwan J. McInroy L. Meddaugh G. Mentzer A.J. Mirtorabi N. Moore M. Moran E. Morey E. Morgan V. Morris S.J. Morrison H. Morshead G. Morter R. Mujadidi Y.F. Muller J. Munera-Huertas T. Munro C. Munro A. Murphy S. Munster V.J. Mweu P. Noé A. Nugent F.L. Nuthall E. O'Brien K. O'Connor D. Oguti B. Oliver J.L. Oliveira C. O'Reilly P.J. Osborn M. Osborne P. Owen C. Owens D. Owino N. Pacurar M. Parker K. Parracho H. Patrick-Smith M. Payne V. Pearce J. Peng Y. Peralta Alvarez M.P. Perring J. Pfafferott K. Pipini D. Plested E. Pluess-Hall H. Pollock K. Poulton I. Presland L. Provstgaard-Morys S. Pulido D. Radia K. Ramos Lopez F. Rand J. Ratcliffe H. Rawlinson T. Rhead S. Riddell A. Ritchie A.J. Roberts H. Robson J. Roche S. Rohde C. Rollier C.S. Romani R. Rudiansyah I. Saich S. Sajjad S. Salvador S. Sanchez Riera L. Sanders H. Sanders K. Sapaun S. Sayce C. Schofield E. Screaton G. Selby B. Semple C. Sharpe H.R. Shaik I. Shea A. Shelton H. Silk S. Silva-Reyes L. Skelly D.T. Smee H. Smith C.C. Smith D.J. Song R. Spencer A.J. Stafford E. Steele A. Stefanova E. Stockdale L. Szigeti A. Tahiri-Alaoui A. Tait M. Talbot H. Tanner R. Taylor I.J. Taylor V. Te Water Naude R. Thakur N. Themistocleous Y. Themistocleous A. Thomas M. Thomas T.M. Thompson A. Thomson-Hill S. Tomlins J. Tonks S. Towner J. Tran N. Tree J.A. Truby A. Turkentine K. Turner C. Turner N. Turner S. Tuthill T. Ulaszewska M. Varughese R. Van Doremalen N. Veighey K. Verheul M.K. Vichos I. Vitale E. Walker L. Watson M.E.E. Welham B. Wheat J. White C. White R. Worth A.T. Wright D. Wright S. Yao X.L. Yau Y. Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report of a phase 1/2, single-blind, randomised controlled trial Lancet 396 10249 2020 467 478 32702298 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31604-4 PMC7445431 63
Wrapp D. Wang N. Corbett K.S. Goldsmith J.A. Hsieh C.L. Abiona O. Graham B.S. McLellan J.S. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation Science 367 6483 2020 1260 1263 32075877 10.1126/science.abb2507 PMC7164637 64
Yan R. Zhang Y. Li Y. Xia L. Guo Y. Zhou Q. Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human ACE2 Science 367 6485 2020 1444 1448 32132184 10.1126/science.abb2762 PMC7164635 65
Kuba K. Imai Y. Rao S. Gao H. Guo F. Guan B. Huan Y. Yang P. Zhang Y. Deng W. Bao L. Zhang B. Liu G. Wang Z. Chappell M. Liu Y. Zheng D. Leibbrandt A. Wada T. Slutsky A.S. Liu D. Qin C. Jiang C. Penninger J.M. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS coronavirus-induced lung injury Nat. Med. 11 8 2005 875 879 16007097 10.1038/nm1267 PMC7095783 66
Kuba K. Imai Y. Ohto-Nakanishi T. Penninger J.M. Trilogy of ACE2: a peptidase in the renin-angiotensin system, a SARS receptor, and a partner for amino acid transporters Pharmacol. Ther. 128 1 2010 119 128 20599443 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.06.003 PMC7112678 67
Hasso M. Perusini S. Eshaghi A. Tang E. Olsha R. Zhang H. Lau E. Sullivan A. Cronin K. Lee S. Obando J. DeLima C. Nagra S. Braukmann T. Duvvuri V.R. Richard-Greenblatt M. Corbeil A. Kus J.V. Majury A. Patel S. Gubbay J.B. Monkeypox virus detection in different clinical specimen types Emerg. Infect. Dis. 28 12 2022 2513 2515 36223653 10.3201/eid2812.221160 PMC9707591 68
Ou X. Liu Y. Lei X. Li P. Mi D. Ren L. Guo L. Guo R. Chen T. Hu J. Xiang Z. Mu Z. Chen X. Chen J. Hu K. Jin Q. Wang J. Qian Z. Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its immune cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV Nat. Commun. 11 1 2020 1620 32221306 10.1038/s41467-020-15562-9 PMC7100515 69
Serfozo P. Wysocki J. Gulua G. Schulze A. Ye M. Liu P. Jin J. Bader M. Myohanen T. Garcia-Horsman J.A. Batlle D. Ang II (angiotensin II) conversion to angiotensin-(1-7) in the circulation is POP (Prolyloligopeptidase)-Dependent and ACE2 (Angiotensin-Converting enzyme 2)-independent Hypertension 75 1 2020 173 182 31786979 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.119.14071 PMC7286421 70
Khan A. Benthin C. Zeno B. Albertson T.E. Boyd J. Christie J.D. Hall R. Poirier G. Ronco J.J. Tidswell M. Hardes K. Powley W.M. Wright T.J. Siederer S.K. Fairman D.A. Lipson D.A. Bayliffe A.I. Lazaar A.L. A pilot clinical trial of recombinant human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 in acute respiratory distress syndrome Crit. Care 21 1 2017 234 28877748 10.1186/s13054-017-1823-x PMC5588692 71
Zhang H. Penninger J.M. Li Y. Zhong N. Slutsky A.S. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as a SARS-CoV-2 receptor: molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic target Intensive Care Med. 46 4 2020 586 590 32125455 10.1007/s00134-020-05985-9 PMC7079879 72
Monteil V. Kwon H. Prado P. Hagelkruys A. Wimmer R.A. Stahl M. Leopoldi A. Garreta E. Hurtado Del Pozo C. Prosper F. Romero J.P. Wirnsberger G. Zhang H. Slutsky A.S. Conder R. Montserrat N. Mirazimi A. Penninger J.M. Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infections in engineered human tissues using clinical-grade soluble human ACE2 Cell 181 4 2020 905 913 e7 32333836 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.004 PMC7181998 73
Iwata-Yoshikawa N. Okamura T. Shimizu Y. Kotani O. Sato H. Sekimukai H. Fukushi S. Suzuki T. Sato Y. Takeda M. Tashiro M. Hasegawa H. Nagata N. Acute respiratory infection in human dipeptidyl peptidase 4-transgenic mice infected with Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus J. Virol. 93 6 2019 10.1128/JVI.01818-18 PMC6401458 30626685 74
Bardou O. Menou A. Francois C. Duitman J.W. von der Thusen J.H. Borie R. Sales K.U. Mutze K. Castier Y. Sage E. Liu L. Bugge T.H. Fairlie D.P. Konigshoff M. Crestani B. Borensztajn K.S. Membrane-anchored serine protease matriptase is a trigger of pulmonary fibrogenesis Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 193 8 2016 847 860 26599507 10.1164/rccm.201502-0299OC PMC4849177 75
Hernandez-Mitre M.P. Morpeth S.C. Venkatesh B. Hills T.E. Davis J. Mahar R.K. McPhee G. Jones M. Totterdell J. Tong S.Y.C. Roberts J.A. TMPRSS2 inhibitors for the treatment of COVID-19 in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials of nafamostat and camostat mesylate Clin. Microbiol. Infection : the official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 30 6 2024 743 754 10.1016/j.cmi.2024.01.029 38331253 76
Shapira T. Monreal I.A. Dion S.P. Buchholz D.W. Imbiakha B. Olmstead A.D. Jager M. Desilets A. Gao G. Martins M. Vandal T. Thompson C.A.H. Chin A. Rees W.D. Steiner T. Nabi I.R. Marsault E. Sahler J. Diel D.G. Van de Walle G.R. August A. Whittaker G.R. Boudreault P.L. Leduc R. Aguilar H.C. Jean F. A TMPRSS2 inhibitor acts as a pan-SARS-CoV-2 prophylactic and therapeutic Nature 605 7909 2022 340 348 35344983 10.1038/s41586-022-04661-w PMC9095466 77
Hoffmann M. Kleine-Weber H. Pohlmann S. A multibasic cleavage site in the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 is essential for infection of human lung cells Mol. Cell. 78 4 2020 779 784 e5 32362314 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.04.022 PMC7194065 78
Lei R.X. Shi H. Peng X.M. Zhu Y.H. Cheng J. Chen G.H. Influence of a single nucleotide polymorphism in the P1 promoter of the furin gene on transcription activity and hepatitis B virus infection Hepatology 50 3 2009 763 771 19492430 10.1002/hep.23062 79
Kouretova J. Hammamy M.Z. Epp A. Hardes K. Kallis S. Zhang L. Hilgenfeld R. Bartenschlager R. Steinmetzer T. Effects of NS2B-NS3 protease and furin inhibition on West Nile and Dengue virus replication J. Enzym. Inhib. Med. Chem. 32 1 2017 712 721 10.1080/14756366.2017.1306521 PMC6445162 28385094 80
Clinical characteristics of 113 deceased patients with coronavirus disease 2019: retrospective study BMJ 368 2020 m1295 32217556 10.1136/bmj.m1091 PMC7190011 81
Kokic G. Hillen H.S. Tegunov D. Dienemann C. Seitz F. Schmitzova J. Farnung L. Siewert A. Hobartner C. Cramer P. Mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 polymerase stalling by remdesivir Nat. Commun. 12 1 2021 279 33436624 10.1038/s41467-020-20542-0 PMC7804290 82
Wroblewski A.E. Glowacka I.E. Piotrowska D.G. 1'-Homonucleosides and their structural analogues: a review Eur. J. Med. Chem. 118 2016 121 142 27128178 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.04.034 83
Elfiky A.A. Zika viral polymerase inhibition using anti-HCV drugs both in market and under clinical trials J. Med. Virol. 88 12 2016 2044 2051 27604059 10.1002/jmv.24678 84
Elfiky A.A. Ismail A. Molecular dynamics and docking reveal the potency of novel GTP derivatives against RNA dependent RNA polymerase of genotype 4a HCV Life Sci. 238 2019 116958 10.1016/j.lfs.2019.116958 31628915 85
Elfiky A.A. Elshemey W.M. IDX-184 is a superior HCV direct-acting antiviral drug: a QSAR study Med. Chem. Res. 25 5 2016 1005 1008 32214769 10.1007/s00044-016-1533-y PMC7080126 86
Elfiky A.A. Ribavirin Remdesivir Sofosbuvir Galidesivir Tenofovir against SARS-CoV-2 RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp): a molecular docking study Life Sci. 253 2020 117592 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.117592 PMC7102646 32222463 87
Giamarellos-Bourboulis E.J. Netea M.G. Rovina N. Akinosoglou K. Antoniadou A. Antonakos N. Damoraki G. Gkavogianni T. Adami M.E. Katsaounou P. Ntaganou M. Kyriakopoulou M. Dimopoulos G. Koutsodimitropoulos I. Velissaris D. Koufargyris P. Karageorgos A. Katrini K. Lekakis V. Lupse M. Kotsaki A. Renieris G. Theodoulou D. Panou V. Koukaki E. Koulouris N. Gogos C. Koutsoukou A. Complex immune dysregulation in COVID-19 patients with severe respiratory failure Cell Host Microbe 27 6 2020 992 1000 e3 32320677 10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009 PMC7172841 88
Pourkarim F. Pourtaghi-Anvarian S. Rezaee H. Molnupiravir: a new candidate for COVID-19 treatment Pharmacol Res Perspect 10 1 2022 e00909 10.1002/prp2.909 PMC8929331 34968008 89
Roberfroid D. Jespers V. Hulstaert F. Molnupiravir for covid-19 in nonhospitalized patients N. Engl. J. Med. 386 13 2022 e32 10.1056/NEJMc2201612 35294807 90
Xie Y. Choi T. Al-Aly Z. Molnupiravir and risk of post-acute sequelae of covid-19: cohort study BMJ 381 2023 e074572 10.1136/bmj-2022-074572 PMC10126525 37161995 91
Butler C.C. Hobbs F.D.R. Gbinigie O.A. Rahman N.M. Hayward G. Richards D.B. Dorward J. Lowe D.M. Standing J.F. Breuer J. Khoo S. Petrou S. Hood K. Nguyen-Van-Tam J.S. Patel M.G. Saville B.R. Marion J. Ogburn E. Allen J. Rutter H. Francis N. Thomas N.P.B. Evans P. Dobson M. Madden T.A. Holmes J. Harris V. Png M.E. Lown M. van Hecke O. Detry M.A. Saunders C.T. Fitzgerald M. Berry N.S. Mwandigha L. Galal U. Mort S. Jani B.D. Hart N.D. Ahmed H. Butler D. McKenna M. Chalk J. Lavallee L. Hadley E. Cureton L. Benysek M. Andersson M. Coates M. Barrett S. Bateman C. Davies J.C. Raymundo-Wood I. Ustianowski A. Carson-Stevens A. Yu L.M. Little P. Group P.T.C. Molnupiravir plus usual care versus usual care alone as early treatment for adults with COVID-19 at increased risk of adverse outcomes (PANORAMIC): an open-label, platform-adaptive randomised controlled trial Lancet (London, England) 401 10373 2023 281 293 36566761 10.1016/S0140-6736(22)02597-1 PMC9779781 92
Gurwitz D. Angiotensin receptor blockers as tentative SARS-CoV-2 therapeutics Drug Dev. Res. 81 5 2020 537 540 32129518 10.1002/ddr.21656 PMC7228359 93
Grein J. Ohmagari N. Shin D. Diaz G. Asperges E. Castagna A. Feldt T. Green G. Green M.L. Lescure F.X. Nicastri E. Oda R. Yo K. Quiros-Roldan E. Studemeister A. Redinski J. Ahmed S. Bernett J. Chelliah D. Chen D. Chihara S. Cohen S.H. Cunningham J. D'Arminio Monforte A. Ismail S. Kato H. Lapadula G. L'Her E. Maeno T. Majumder S. Massari M. Mora-Rillo M. Mutoh Y. Nguyen D. Verweij E. Zoufaly A. Osinusi A.O. DeZure A. Zhao Y. Zhong L. Chokkalingam A. Elboudwarej E. Telep L. Timbs L. Henne I. Sellers S. Cao H. Tan S.K. Winterbourne L. Desai P. Mera R. Gaggar A. Myers R.P. Brainard D.M. Childs R. Flanigan T. Compassionate use of remdesivir for patients with severe covid-19 N. Engl. J. Med. 382 24 2020 2327 2336 32275812 10.1056/NEJMoa2007016 PMC7169476 94
Antinori S. Cossu M.V. Ridolfo A.L. Rech R. Bonazzetti C. Pagani G. Gubertini G. Coen M. Magni C. Castelli A. Borghi B. Colombo R. Giorgi R. Angeli E. Mileto D. Milazzo L. Vimercati S. Pellicciotta M. Corbellino M. Torre A. Rusconi S. Oreni L. Gismondo M.R. Giacomelli A. Meroni L. Rizzardini G. Galli M. Compassionate remdesivir treatment of severe Covid-19 pneumonia in intensive care unit (ICU) and Non-ICU patients: clinical outcome and differences in post-treatment hospitalisation status Pharmacol. Res. 158 2020 104899 10.1016/j.phrs.2020.104899 PMC7212963 32407959 95
Keech C. Albert G. Cho I. Robertson A. Reed P. Neal S. Plested J.S. Zhu M. Cloney-Clark S. Zhou H. Smith G. Patel N. Frieman M.B. Haupt R.E. Logue J. McGrath M. Weston S. Piedra P.A. Desai C. Callahan K. Lewis M. Price-Abbott P. Formica N. Shinde V. Fries L. Lickliter J.D. Griffin P. Wilkinson B. Glenn G.M. Phase 1-2 trial of a SARS-CoV-2 recombinant spike protein nanoparticle vaccine N. Engl. J. Med. 383 24 2020 2320 2332 32877576 10.1056/NEJMoa2026920 PMC7494251 96
Chappell K.J. Mordant F.L. Li Z. Wijesundara D.K. Ellenberg P. Lackenby J.A. Cheung S.T.M. Modhiran N. Avumegah M.S. Henderson C.L. Hoger K. Griffin P. Bennet J. Hensen L. Zhang W. Nguyen T.H.O. Marrero-Hernandez S. Selva K.J. Chung A.W. Tran M.H. Tapley P. Barnes J. Reading P.C. Nicholson S. Corby S. Holgate T. Wines B.D. Hogarth P.M. Kedzierska K. Purcell D.F.J. Ranasinghe C. Subbarao K. Watterson D. Young P.R. Munro T.P. Safety and immunogenicity of an MF59-adjuvanted spike glycoprotein-clamp vaccine for SARS-CoV-2: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 trial Lancet Infect. Dis. 21 10 2021 1383 1394 33887208 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00200-0 PMC8055208 97
Smargon A.A. Cox D.B.T. Pyzocha N.K. Zheng K. Slaymaker I.M. Gootenberg J.S. Abudayyeh O.A. Essletzbichler P. Shmakov S. Makarova K.S. Koonin E.V. Zhang F. Cas13b is a type VI-B CRISPR-associated RNA-guided RNase differentially regulated by accessory proteins Csx27 and Csx28 Mol. Cell. 65 4 2017 618 630 e7 28065598 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.12.023 PMC5432119 98
Yan W.X. Chong S. Zhang H. Makarova K.S. Koonin E.V. Cheng D.R. Scott D.A. Cas13d is a compact RNA-targeting type VI CRISPR effector positively modulated by a WYL-domain-containing accessory protein Mol. Cell. 70 2 2018 327 339 e5 29551514 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.02.028 PMC5935466 99
Abbott T.R. Dhamdhere G. Liu Y. Lin X. Goudy L. Zeng L. Chemparathy A. Chmura S. Heaton N.S. Debs R. Pande T. Endy D. La Russa M.F. Lewis D.B. Qi L.S. Development of CRISPR as an antiviral strategy to combat SARS-CoV-2 and influenza Cell 181 4 2020 865 876 e12 32353252 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.020 PMC7189862 100
Hung I.F.-N. Lung K.-C. Tso E.Y.-K. Liu R. Chung T.W.-H. Chu M.-Y. Ng Y.-Y. Lo J. Chan J. Tam A.R. Shum H.-P. Chan V. Wu A.K.-L. Sin K.-M. Leung W.-S. Law W.-L. Lung D.C. Sin S. Yeung P. Yip C.C.-Y. Zhang R.R. Fung A.Y.-F. Yan E.Y.-W. Leung K.-H. Ip J.D. Chu A.W.-H. Chan W.-M. Ng A.C.-K. Lee R. Fung K. Yeung A. Wu T.-C. Chan J.W.-M. Yan W.-W. Chan W.-M. Chan J.F.-W. Lie A.K.-W. Tsang O.T.-Y. Cheng V.C.-C. Que T.-L. Lau C.-S. Chan K.-H. To K.K.-W. Yuen K.-Y. Triple combination of interferon beta-1b, lopinavir–ritonavir, and ribavirin in the treatment of patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19: an open-label, randomised, phase 2 trial Lancet 395 10238 2020 1695 1704 32401715 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31042-4 PMC7211500 101
Ma C. Tan H. Choza J. Wang Y. Wang J. Validation and invalidation of SARS-CoV-2 main protease inhibitors using the Flip-GFP and Protease-Glo luciferase assays Acta Pharm. Sin. B 12 4 2022 1636 1651 34745850 10.1016/j.apsb.2021.10.026 PMC8558150 102
Fu L. Ye F. Feng Y. Yu F. Wang Q. Wu Y. Zhao C. Sun H. Huang B. Niu P. Song H. Shi Y. Li X. Tan W. Qi J. Gao G.F. Both Boceprevir and GC376 efficaciously inhibit SARS-CoV-2 by targeting its main protease Nat. Commun. 11 1 2020 4417 32887884 10.1038/s41467-020-18233-x PMC7474075 103
Ma C. Sacco M.D. Hurst B. Townsend J.A. Hu Y. Szeto T. Zhang X. Tarbet B. Marty M.T. Chen Y. Wang J. Boceprevir, GC-376, and calpain inhibitors II, XII inhibit SARS-CoV-2 viral replication by targeting the viral main protease Cell Res. 30 8 2020 678 692 32541865 10.1038/s41422-020-0356-z PMC7294525 104
Moghadasi S.A. Heilmann E. Khalil A.M. Nnabuife C. Kearns F.L. Ye C. Moraes S.N. Costacurta F. Esler M.A. Aihara H. von Laer D. Martinez-Sobrido L. Palzkill T. Amaro R.E. Harris R.S. Transmissible SARS-CoV-2 variants with resistance to clinical protease inhibitors Sci. Adv. 9 13 2023 eade8778 10.1126/sciadv.ade8778 PMC10058310 36989354 105
McCarthy M.W. Ensitrelvir as a potential treatment for COVID-19 Expet Opin. Pharmacother. 23 18 2022 1995 1998 10.1080/14656566.2022.2146493 36350029 106
Higashi-Kuwata N. Tsuji K. Hayashi H. Bulut H. Kiso M. Imai M. Ogata-Aoki H. Ishii T. Kobayakawa T. Nakano K. Takamune N. Kishimoto N. Hattori S.I. Das D. Uemura Y. Shimizu Y. Aoki M. Hasegawa K. Suzuki S. Nishiyama A. Saruwatari J. Shimizu Y. Sukenaga Y. Takamatsu Y. Tsuchiya K. Maeda K. Yoshimura K. Iida S. Ozono S. Suzuki T. Okamura T. Misumi S. Kawaoka Y. Tamamura H. Mitsuya H. Identification of SARS-CoV-2 M(pro) inhibitors containing P1' 4-fluorobenzothiazole moiety highly active against SARS-CoV-2 Nat. Commun. 14 1 2023 1076 36841831 10.1038/s41467-023-36729-0 PMC9958325 107
Mukae H. Yotsuyanagi H. Ohmagari N. Doi Y. Sakaguchi H. Sonoyama T. Ichihashi G. Sanaki T. Baba K. Tsuge Y. Uehara T. Efficacy and safety of Ensitrelvir in patients with mild-to-moderate coronavirus disease 2019: the phase 2b part of a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 2/3 study Clin. Infect. Dis. 76 8 2023 1403 1411 36477182 10.1093/cid/ciac933 PMC10110269 108
Sasaki M. Tabata K. Kishimoto M. Itakura Y. Kobayashi H. Ariizumi T. Uemura K. Toba S. Kusakabe S. Maruyama Y. Iida S. Nakajima N. Suzuki T. Yoshida S. Nobori H. Sanaki T. Kato T. Shishido T. Hall W.W. Orba Y. Sato A. Sawa H. S-217622, a SARS-CoV-2 main protease inhibitor, decreases viral load and ameliorates COVID-19 severity in hamsters Sci. Transl. Med. 15 679 2023 eabq4064 36327352 10.1126/scitranslmed.abq4064 PMC9765455 109
Amani B. Amani B. Efficacy and safety of nirmatrelvir/ritonavir (Paxlovid) for COVID-19: a rapid review and meta-analysis J. Med. Virol. 95 2 2023 e28441 10.1002/jmv.28441 PMC9880713 36576379 110
Anderson A.S. Caubel P. Rusnak J.M. Investigators E.-H.T. Nirmatrelvir-ritonavir and viral load rebound in covid-19 N. Engl. J. Med. 387 11 2022 1047 1049 36069818 10.1056/NEJMc2205944 PMC9513855 111
Duan Y. Zhou H. Liu X. Iketani S. Lin M. Zhang X. Bian Q. Wang H. Sun H. Hong S.J. Culbertson B. Mohri H. Luck M.I. Zhu Y. Liu X. Lu Y. Yang X. Yang K. Sabo Y. Chavez A. Goff S.P. Rao Z. Ho D.D. Yang H. Molecular mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 resistance to nirmatrelvir Nature 622 7982 2023 376 382 37696289 10.1038/s41586-023-06609-0 112
Najjar-Debbiny R. Gronich N. Weber G. Khoury J. Amar M. Stein N. Goldstein L.H. Saliba W. Effectiveness of Paxlovid in reducing severe coronavirus disease 2019 and mortality in high-risk patients Clin. Infect. Dis. 76 3 2023 e342 e349 35653428 10.1093/cid/ciac443 PMC9214014 113
McCarthy M.W. Paxlovid as a potential treatment for long COVID Expet Opin. Pharmacother. 24 17 2023 1839 1843 10.1080/14656566.2023.2262387 37731377 114
Mishra A.K. Wallin T.J. Pan W. Xu A. Wang K. Giannelis E.P. Mazzolai B. Shepherd R.F. Autonomic perspiration in 3D-printed hydrogel actuators Sci. Robot. 5 38 2020 10.1126/scirobotics.aaz3918 33022596 115
Cao B. Wang Y. Wen D. Liu W. Wang J. Fan G. Ruan L. Song B. Cai Y. Wei M. Li X. Xia J. Chen N. Xiang J. Yu T. Bai T. Xie X. Zhang L. Li C. Yuan Y. Chen H. Li H. Huang H. Tu S. Gong F. Liu Y. Wei Y. Dong C. Zhou F. Gu X. Xu J. Liu Z. Zhang Y. Li H. Shang L. Wang K. Li K. Zhou X. Dong X. Qu Z. Lu S. Hu X. Ruan S. Luo S. Wu J. Peng L. Cheng F. Pan L. Zou J. Jia C. Wang J. Liu X. Wang S. Wu X. Ge Q. He J. Zhan H. Qiu F. Guo L. Huang C. Jaki T. Hayden F.G. Horby P.W. Zhang D. Wang C. A trial of lopinavir-ritonavir in adults hospitalized with severe covid-19 N. Engl. J. Med. 382 19 2020 1787 1799 32187464 10.1056/NEJMoa2001282 PMC7121492 116
Tan H. Hu Y. Jadhav P. Tan B. Wang J. Progress and challenges in targeting the SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease J. Med. Chem. 65 11 2022 7561 7580 35620927 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00303 PMC9159073 117
Freitas B.T. Durie I.A. Murray J. Longo J.E. Miller H.C. Crich D. Hogan R.J. Tripp R.A. Pegan S.D. Characterization and noncovalent inhibition of the deubiquitinase and deISGylase activity of SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease ACS Infect. Dis. 6 8 2020 2099 2109 32428392 10.1021/acsinfecdis.0c00168 118
Calleja D.J. Lessene G. Komander D. Inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 PLpro Front. Chem. 10 2022 876212 10.3389/fchem.2022.876212 PMC9086436 35559224 119
Gao X. Qin B. Chen P. Zhu K. Hou P. Wojdyla J.A. Wang M. Cui S. Crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease Acta Pharm. Sin. B 11 1 2021 237 245 32895623 10.1016/j.apsb.2020.08.014 PMC7467110 120
Osipiuk J. Azizi S.A. Dvorkin S. Endres M. Jedrzejczak R. Jones K.A. Kang S. Kathayat R.S. Kim Y. Lisnyak V.G. Maki S.L. Nicolaescu V. Taylor C.A. Tesar C. Zhang Y.A. Zhou Z. Randall G. Michalska K. Snyder S.A. Dickinson B.C. Joachimiak A. Structure of papain-like protease from SARS-CoV-2 and its complexes with non-covalent inhibitors Nat. Commun. 12 1 2021 743 33531496 10.1038/s41467-021-21060-3 PMC7854729 121
Agrawal N. Pathak S. Goyal A. Potential papain-like protease inhibitors against COVID-19: a comprehensive in silico based review Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screen. 25 11 2022 1838 1858 34809541 10.2174/1386207325666211122123602 122
Tiwari A. Singh G. Choudhir G. Motiwale M. Joshi N. Sharma V. Srivastava R.K. Sharma S. Tutone M. Singour P.K. Deciphering the potential of pre and pro-vitamin D of mushrooms against Mpro and PLpro proteases of COVID-19: an in silico approach Molecules 27 17 2022 10.3390/molecules27175620 PMC9458008 36080385 123
Klemm T. Ebert G. Calleja D.J. Allison C.C. Richardson L.W. Bernardini J.P. Lu B.G. Kuchel N.W. Grohmann C. Shibata Y. Gan Z.Y. Cooney J.P. Doerflinger M. Au A.E. Blackmore T.R. van der Heden van Noort G.J. Geurink P.P. Ovaa H. Newman J. Riboldi-Tunnicliffe A. Czabotar P.E. Mitchell J.P. Feltham R. Lechtenberg B.C. Lowes K.N. Dewson G. Pellegrini M. Lessene G. Komander D. Mechanism and inhibition of the papain-like protease, PLpro, of SARS-CoV-2 EMBO J. 39 18 2020 e106275 10.15252/embj.2020106275 PMC7461020 32845033 124
Zhao Y. Du X. Duan Y. Pan X. Sun Y. You T. Han L. Jin Z. Shang W. Yu J. Guo H. Liu Q. Wu Y. Peng C. Wang J. Zhu C. Yang X. Yang K. Lei Y. Guddat L.W. Xu W. Xiao G. Sun L. Zhang L. Rao Z. Yang H. High-throughput screening identifies established drugs as SARS-CoV-2 PLpro inhibitors Protein Cell 12 11 2021 877 888 33864621 10.1007/s13238-021-00836-9 PMC8052528 125
Ma C. Wang J. Validation and invalidation of SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease inhibitors ACS Pharmacol. Transl. Sci. 5 2 2022 102 109 35178512 10.1021/acsptsci.1c00240 PMC8806001 126
Shen Z. Ratia K. Cooper L. Kong D. Lee H. Kwon Y. Li Y. Alqarni S. Huang F. Dubrovskyi O. Rong L. Thatcher G.R.J. Xiong R. Design of SARS-CoV-2 PLpro inhibitors for COVID-19 antiviral therapy leveraging binding cooperativity J. Med. Chem. 65 4 2022 2940 2955 34665619 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c01307 PMC8547495 127
Garnsey M.C.R. Michelle R. Nguyen Luong T. Cardin Rhonda Tillotson Joseph Mashalidis Ellene Yu Aijia Aschenbrenner Lisa Balesano Amanda Behzadi Amin Boras Britton Chang Jeanne S. Eng Heather Ephron Andrew Foley Tim Ford Kristen K. Frick James M. Gibson Scott Hao Li Hurst Brett Kalgutkar Amit S. Korczynska Magdalena Lengyel-Zhand Zsofia Gao Liping Meredith Hannah R. Patel Nandini C. Polivkova Jana Rai Devendra Rose Colin R. Rothan Hussin Sakata Sylvie K. Vargo Thomas R. Qi Wenying Wu Huixian Liu Yiping Yurgelonis Irina Zhang Jinzhi Zhu Yuao Zhang Lei Lee Alpha A. Discovery of SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease (PLpro) inhibitors with efficacy in a murine infection model bioRxiv 2024 1 12 128
Tan B. Zhang X. Ansari A. Jadhav P. Tan H. Li K. Chopra A. Ford A. Chi X. Ruiz F.X. Arnold E. Deng X. Wang J. Design of a SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease inhibitor with antiviral efficacy in a mouse model Science (New York, N.Y.) 383 6690 2024 1434 1440 38547259 10.1126/science.adm9724 PMC12178660 129
Schutz D. Ruiz-Blanco Y.B. Munch J. Kirchhoff F. Sanchez-Garcia E. Muller J.A. Peptide and peptide-based inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 entry Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 167 2020 47 65 33189768 10.1016/j.addr.2020.11.007 PMC7665879 130
Chopra A. Shukri A.H. Adhikary H. Lukinovic V. Hoekstra M. Cowpland M. Biggar K.K. A peptide array pipeline for the development of Spike-ACE2 interaction inhibitors Peptides 158 2022 170898 10.1016/j.peptides.2022.170898 PMC9585897 36279985 131
Yang K. Wang C. Kreutzberger A.J.B. Ojha R. Kuivanen S. Couoh-Cardel S. Muratcioglu S. Eisen T.J. White K.I. Held R.G. Subramanian S. Marcus K. Pfuetzner R.A. Esquivies L. Doyle C.A. Kuriyan J. Vapalahti O. Balistreri G. Kirchhausen T. Brunger A.T. Nanomolar inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infection by an unmodified peptide targeting the prehairpin intermediate of the spike protein Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 119 40 2022 e2210990119 10.1073/pnas.2210990119 PMC9546559 36122200 132
Xia S. Liu M. Wang C. Xu W. Lan Q. Feng S. Qi F. Bao L. Du L. Liu S. Qin C. Sun F. Shi Z. Zhu Y. Jiang S. Lu L. Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 (previously 2019-nCoV) infection by a highly potent pan-coronavirus fusion inhibitor targeting its spike protein that harbors a high capacity to mediate membrane fusion Cell Res. 30 4 2020 343 355 32231345 10.1038/s41422-020-0305-x PMC7104723 133
Thijssen V. Hurdiss D.L. Debski-Antoniak O.J. Spence M.A. Franck C. Norman A. Aggarwal A. Mokiem N.J. van Dongen D.A.A. Vermeir S.W. Liu M. Li W. Chatziandreou M. Donselaar T. Du W. Drulyte I. Bosch B.J. Snijder J. Turville S.G. Payne R.J. Jackson C.J. van Kuppeveld F.J.M. Jongkees S.A.K. A broad-spectrum macrocyclic peptide inhibitor of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120 26 2023 e2303292120 10.1073/pnas.2303292120 PMC10293842 37339194 134
Yan Y. Zou Z. Sun Y. Li X. Xu K.F. Wei Y. Jin N. Jiang C. Anti-malaria drug chloroquine is highly effective in treating avian influenza A H5N1 virus infection in an animal model Cell Res. 23 2 2013 300 302 23208422 10.1038/cr.2012.165 PMC3567830 135
Wang M. Cao R. Zhang L. Yang X. Liu J. Xu M. Shi Z. Hu Z. Zhong W. Xiao G. Remdesivir and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro Cell Res. 30 3 2020 269 271 32020029 10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0 PMC7054408 136
Mehra M.R. Desai S.S. Ruschitzka F. Patel A.N. RETRACTED: hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine with or without a macrolide for treatment of COVID-19: a multinational registry analysis Lancet. 20 2020 31324 31326 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31180-6 PMC7255293 32450107 137
Karki R. Sharma B.R. Tuladhar S. Williams E.P. Zalduondo L. Samir P. Zheng M. Sundaram B. Banoth B. Malireddi R.K.S. Schreiner P. Neale G. Vogel P. Webby R. Jonsson C.B. Kanneganti T.D. Synergism of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma triggers inflammatory cell death, tissue damage, and mortality in SARS-CoV-2 infection and cytokine shock syndromes Cell 184 1 2021 149 168 e17 33278357 10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.025 PMC7674074 138
Channappanavar R. Fehr A.R. Zheng J. Wohlford-Lenane C. Abrahante J.E. Mack M. Sompallae R. McCray P.B. Jr. Meyerholz D.K. Perlman S. IFN-I response timing relative to virus replication determines MERS coronavirus infection outcomes J. Clin. Invest. 129 9 2019 3625 3639 31355779 10.1172/JCI126363 PMC6715373 139
Channappanavar R. Fehr A.R. Vijay R. Mack M. Zhao J. Meyerholz D.K. Perlman S. Dysregulated type I interferon and inflammatory monocyte-macrophage responses cause lethal pneumonia in SARS-CoV-infected mice Cell Host Microbe 19 2 2016 181 193 26867177 10.1016/j.chom.2016.01.007 PMC4752723 140
Menachery V.D. Eisfeld A.J. Schafer A. Josset L. Sims A.C. Proll S. Fan S. Li C. Neumann G. Tilton S.C. Chang J. Gralinski L.E. Long C. Green R. Williams C.M. Weiss J. Matzke M.M. Webb-Robertson B.J. Schepmoes A.A. Shukla A.K. Metz T.O. Smith R.D. Waters K.M. Katze M.G. Kawaoka Y. Baric R.S. Pathogenic influenza viruses and coronaviruses utilize similar and contrasting approaches to control interferon-stimulated gene responses mBio 5 3 2014 e01174 -14 10.1128/mBio.01174-14 PMC4030454 24846384 141
Wan S. Xiang Y. Fang W. Zheng Y. Li B. Hu Y. Lang C. Huang D. Sun Q. Xiong Y. Huang X. Lv J. Luo Y. Shen L. Yang H. Huang G. Yang R. Clinical features and treatment of COVID-19 patients in northeast Chongqing J. Med. Virol. 92 7 2020 797 806 32198776 10.1002/jmv.25783 PMC7228368 142
Qiu H. Wu J. Hong L. Luo Y. Song Q. Chen D. Clinical and epidemiological features of 36 children with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Zhejiang, China: an observational cohort study Lancet Infect. Dis. 20 6 2020 689 696 32220650 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30198-5 PMC7158906 143
Huang K. Zhang P. Zhang Z. Youn J.Y. Wang C. Zhang H. Cai H. Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) in the treatment of COVID-19 and other viral infections: efficacies and mechanisms Pharmacol. Ther. 225 2021 107843 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107843 PMC8011334 33811957 144
Jiang F. Xu N. Zhou Y. Song J. Liu J. Zhu H. Jiang J. Xu Y. Li R. Contribution of traditional Chinese medicine combined with conventional western medicine treatment for the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), current evidence with systematic review and meta-analysis Phytother Res. 35 11 2021 5992 6009 34256418 10.1002/ptr.7209 PMC8441775 145
Zhang Y. Liu Y. Li M. Feng S. Li X. Gao Z. Yang Y. Tong X. Timely treatment and higher compliance to traditional Chinese medicine: new influencing factors for reducing severe COVID-19 based on retrospective cohorts in 2020 and 2021 Pharmacol. Res. 178 2022 106174 10.1016/j.phrs.2022.106174 PMC8915454 35288309 146
Ren J.L. Zhang A.H. Wang X.J. Traditional Chinese medicine for COVID-19 treatment Pharmacol. Res. 155 2020 104743 10.1016/j.phrs.2020.104743 PMC7128263 32145402 147
Li Y. Qin Y. Chen N. Ge L. Wang Q. Aboudou T. Han J. Hou L. Cao L. Li R. Li M. Mi N. Xie P. Wu S. Hu L. Li X. Song Z. Ji J. Zhang Z. Yang K. Use of traditional Chinese medicine for the treatment and prevention of COVID-19 and rehabilitation of COVID-19 patients: an evidence mapping study Front. Pharmacol. 14 2023 1069879 10.3389/fphar.2023.1069879 PMC9892723 36744266 148
Zhao Y. Zhao B. Liang Y.B. Successful treatment of subacute thyroiditis after recombinant COVID-19 vaccination using traditional Chinese medicine: a case report Cureus 14 10 2022 e30716 10.7759/cureus.30716 PMC9612889 36320792 149
Ling Y. Dong Y. Li Q. Huang D. Li Z. Chen M. Treatment of COVID-19 by monoclonal antibodies and the traditional Chinese medicine Med Nov Technol Devices 15 2022 100159 10.1016/j.medntd.2022.100159 PMC9343068 35937968 150
Hu Y. Lewandowski E.M. Tan H. Zhang X. Morgan R.T. Zhang X. Jacobs L.M.C. Butler S.G. Gongora M.V. Choy J. Deng X. Chen Y. Wang J. Naturally occurring mutations of SARS-CoV-2 main protease confer drug resistance to nirmatrelvir ACS Cent. Sci. 9 8 2023 1658 1669 37637734 10.1021/acscentsci.3c00538 PMC10451032 151
Iketani S. Ho D.D. SARS-CoV-2 resistance to monoclonal antibodies and small-molecule drugs Cell Chem. Biol. 31 4 2024 632 657 38640902 10.1016/j.chembiol.2024.03.008 PMC11084874